lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga is an-upcoming-lego-themed-action-adventure-game scheduled to be released for microsoft-windows, nintendo-switch, playstation 4, playstation 5, xbox one, and xbox-series-x/s.
it will be the-sixth-entry in tt-games'-lego-star-wars-series of video-games and the-successor to lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens.
an-upcoming-lego-themed-action-adventure-game scheduled to be released for microsoft-windows, nintendo-switch, playstation 4, playstation 5, xbox one, and xbox-series-x/s. will adapt all-nine-entries in the-skywalker-saga-series of films.
gameplay ==
unlike most-lego-video-games in which players had to advance through the-story in a-linear-order, players can choose to start the-game from any of the-nine-skywalker-saga-episodes and complete-players in any-order players wish.
each-episode will have five-story-missions, making a-total of 45-levels, contrasting from six-levels per episode in previous-games.
combat has been revamped from previous-titles, such as lightsaber-wielders now using a-variety of combos with light-attacks, heavy-attacks, and force-moves, and blaster-characters having an over-the-shoulder camera (angle featured in many-third-person-shooter-games).
the-game features 300-playable-characters.
much like its-predecessor, lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, the-game's-hub will not be a-single-area, such as the-mos-eisley-cantina in lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga, but a-wide-range of fully-explorable-planets filled with many-iconic-star-wars-landmarks.
planets and moons confirmed by the-developers so far to be explorable in the-hub  include naboo, tatooine, coruscant, kamino, geonosis, kashyyyk, utapau, mustafar, yavin 4, hoth, dagobah, bespin, endor, jakku, takodana, d'qar, starkiller-base, ahch-to, cantonica, crait, ajan-kloss, pasaana, kijimi, kef-bir, and exegol.
many-ships will have freely-explorable-areas in the-hub as well, such as star-destroyers and the-death-star.
random-encounters will also happen in the-game's-hub.
for example, an-imperial-star-destroyer could suddenly jump out of hyperspace and send a-fleet of tie-fighters after the-player.
players can choose to engage in dogfights with players or continue onward to progress the-story.
development and marketing ==
lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga was first teased to be in development by lucasfilm-sound-editor-matthew-wood at star-wars-celebration-chicago.
an-announcement-trailer premiered at e3 2019 during microsoft's-press-conference.
a-second-trailer showing one-scene from all-nine-movies was released on 20-december to coincide with the-release of the-rise of skywalker.
the-official-artwork was revealed on 4 may 2020.disney and lucasfilm had not shared significant-details of the-rise of skywalker-skywalker with the-game-team before the-film's-release.
in the-meantime, tt-games worked on other-aspects of the-game until lucasfilm shared more-details.
the-game is developed in traveller's-tales'-new-engine, ntt (pronounced-entity).
like lego-star-wars :
the-force-awakens,-lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga will use original voice acting, with the-first-actor of the-game being billy-dee-williams voicing lando-calrissian.
release ==
on 7-may 2020, the-release-date was mentioned as 20-october 2020 through the-star-wars-youtube-channel.
on the-same-day, the-original-video was made private and a new video, in which the-release-date was cut out, was uploaded.
this-date was not otherwise confirmed.
on 26-august 2020, the-lego-website displayed the-release-date as being 2021, but the-lego-website was taken down.
the-lego-website has since been updated to remove any-suggestion of a-release-year.
the following day at the-2020-gamescom-opening-night-live, the-lego-website was announced that the-game would release in q1/q2 2021 under the-description of "spring 2021" with additional-versions on the-playstation-5-and-xbox-series-x/s.
on 2-april 2021, it was announced that the-game had been delayed, with no-further-release-window specified.
the-game will be available in a-standard-edition and a-deluxe-edition.
standard-edition includes the-character-collection-bundle, which collects six-character-packs based around characters from outside of the-skywalker-saga, which consists of packs from the-mandalorian, rogue one:
a-star-wars-story,-solo:
a-star-wars-story, the-forthcoming-series star-wars:
the-bad-batch and a-pack containing classic-characters.
the-retail-deluxe-edition will come with an-exclusive-luke-skywalker with blue-milk-minifigure, and different-box-art showcasing darth-vader, with an-exclusive-luke-skywalker mask being removable by lifting up the-included-slipcase.
physical-deluxe-editions will be released for nintendo-switch, playstation 4, playstation 5 and an-xbox-version which can function as both-the-xbox-one-and-xbox-series-x/s-versions depending on which-console it is played on.
a-steelbook resembling han-solo in carbonite is included with pre-orders of any-edition from best-buy or best-buy canada or pre-orders of the-deluxe-edition-bundle from game.
references ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars-rebels is an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation.
an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation follows a-motley-group of rebels conducting covert-operations to thwart the-sinister-galactic-empire.
==-wicket-wystri-warrick is a-fictional-character from the-star-wars-franchise, first introduced and portrayed by warwick-davis in the-1983-film-return of the-jedi.
wicket-wystri-warrick appeared in two non-canonical made-for-television movies, an-animated-series, and promotional-media for star-wars from 1983 to 1986.
warwick-davis reprised the-role in the-2019-theatrical-film the-rise of skywalker, appearing in a-brief-cameo.
wicket is a-diminutive-teddy-bear-like-creature known as an-ewok, living on the-forest-moon of endor and eventually participating in the-battle of endor as an-ally of the-rebel-alliance.
character == ===
development ===
in concluding his-original-star-wars-trilogy, george-lucas had foreseen the-decisive-battle in the-galactic-civil-war taking place between the-wookiees and the-empire; however, george-lucas considered chewbacca too skilled with technology, and wanted a-more-primitive-species than the-wookiees to defeat the-empire.
a-few-different-creatures, such as the-stilt-legged-yuzzums, were proposed before the-diminutive-bear-like-design of the-ewoks was settled on.
although neither-the-word ewok nor any of the ewok names are actually mentioned in return of the-jedi, a-handful of ewoks were named by the-production, mentioned in the-novelization, and first appeared in the-kenner-action-figure-line based on the-movie.
the-main-focal-point of this-new-ewok-species was to be wicket-wystri-warrick, a-small-young-male-scout and warrior.
generally considered to be the most well known of the-ewoks, wicket would be given the-lead-role in almost-all-subsequent-ewok-related-media released after return of the-jedithe-jedi.
casting ===
wicket was portrayed by warwick-davis in 1983's-return of the-jedi.
the-then-11-year-old-actor came to be involved in the-film after the-then-11-year-old-actor grandmother heard a-radio-ad calling for short-actors.
warwick-davis began work on the-film in january 1982.
originally cast as a-generic-ewok, davis caught the-eye of george-lucas with aspects of davis performance, such as davis ability to stick davis tongue through davis ewok mask and the-inquisitive-tilting of davis head (which was inspired by davis' dog).
kenny-baker was originally set to take the-role of wicket; however, kenny-baker fell ill with food-poisoning, and davis was called in as a-replacement.
appearances == ===
the-character made the-character first appearance in the-1983-film-return of the-jedi.
wicket was the-first-ewok to appear on screen, encountering princess-leia-organa after princess-leia-organa survived princess-leia-organa speeder bike chase, bringing princess-leia-organa to wicket tree-top-ewok-village, and making contact with the-rebel-alliance during the-battle of endor.
wicket was also featured in the-later-village-scenes, as well as helping the-rebel-alliance during the-battle of endor itself, attacking imperial-stormtroopers with imperial-stormtroopers slingshot.
at the-end of the-rise of skywalker, wicket makes a-brief-appearance alongside pommet-warrick, wicket son, celebrating the-defeat of darth-sidious and the-sith-eternal.
warwick-davis reprised  warwick-davis character, alongside  warwick-davis son harrison-davis, who played pommet.
forces of destiny ===
wicket appears in the-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny.
legends ==
in april 2014 (with the-sequel-film the-force awakens in production), lucasfilm separated the-star-wars-expanded-universe (rebranded as star-wars-legends) from official-star-wars-canon.
television-films ====
wicket was featured in the-1984-tv-film the-ewok-adventure (set before return of the-jedi), theatrically released as caravan of courage: an-ewok-adventure.
in the-film,  in the-film accompanies stranded-brother and sister-mace and cindel-towani as
in the-film and the-ewoks help find and rescue the-children's-missing-parents from the-giant-gorax.
wicket is revealed to be the-son of deej and shodu, and has two-older-brothers, weechee and widdle.
wicket would return the following year in a-sequel, ewoks: the-battle for endor.
in the-film, wicket helps cindel and new-allies noa (wilfred-brimley) and teek defeat king-terak and king-terak sanyassan marauders.
the-film strengthened the-bonds between wicket and cindel, with wicket rescuing wicket family and learning to speak some-galactic-basic (which wicket seems to have forgotten by the-time of return of the-jedi).
ewoks ====
wicket was the-main-character in the-animated-series-ewoks, which ran for two-seasons in 1985 and 1986, consisting of 35-episodes.
this-children's-cartoon-series, set in the-fictional-bright-tree-village, mostly featured the-antics of wicket-and-wicket-family (in line with the-tv-movies).
wicket's-friends kneesaa and latara were introduced, and further-backstories for existing-ewok-characters teebo, paploo, chief-chirpa, and logray were established.
the-series would also often showcase wicket and the-ewoks'-battles with the-duloks, morag the-witch, and other-creatures on the-moon of endor.
related-works and merchandising ==
in the-1980s, wicket was heavily featured in several-promotional-items, toys, children's-books, read-along-records and cassettes and comic-books.
reception ==
wicket and the-ewoks are a-controversial-addition to return of the-jedi and the-star-wars-universe in general, and are seen by some to be the-weakest-link of the-original-trilogy.
according to tami-katzoff of mtv-news, "a-prevailing-theory among ewok-haters is that the-creatures were originally conceived as a-sure-way to appeal to small-children and sell plush-toys to small-children parents.
the-ewoks have some-defenders, and have proven to be very popular with children from some-defenders introduction in the 1980s to the-present-day.
references == ==
external-links == wicket w.-warrick on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki wicket w.-warrick in the-starwars.com-databank
wicket-w.-warrick on imdb
the-following is a-list of cast-members who have appeared in the-mtv-reality-series-ex on the-beach.
bold indicates original-cast-member; all-other-cast were brought into the-series as an-ex.^-ages at the-time the-cast-member appeared in the-serieskey:
=-"cast-member"-returns to the-beach for the-second-time.
=-"cast-member"-returns to the-beach for the-third-time.
duration of cast == key:
"cast-member" is featured in this-episode.
"cast-member" arrives on the-beach.
"cast-member" has an-ex arrive on the-beach.
"cast-member" arrives on the-beach and has an-ex arrive during the-same-episode.
= "cast-member" leaves the-beach.
"cast-member" has an-ex arrive on the-beach and leaves during the-same-episode.
"cast-member" arrives on the-beach and leaves during the-same-episode.
"cast-member" does not feature in the-same-episode.
==-series 1 ===
===-series 2 === ===
===-===-series 4
===-===-series 5
===-===-series 6 ===
===-series 7
===-===-series 8 === ===
===-===-series 11 === ==
other-appearances ==
in addition to appearing on ex on the-beach, some of the-cast-members went on to compete in other-reality-series including celebrity-big-brother, big-brother, and the-challenge.
challenges in bold indicate the-cast-member was a-finalist on the-challenge.
references ==
this is a-list of star-wars cast-members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series.
a-list of star-wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series is sorted by film and character, as some of the-characters were portrayed by multiple-actors.
as the-franchise is composed of multiple-films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple-lead-actors.
in the-primary-series, dubbed the "skywalker saga", mark-hamill and carrie-fisher starred as luke-skywalker and princess-leia respectively in the-original-films star-wars (1977)
, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983) and reprised the-roles in the-sequel-trilogy-films
star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015),
star-wars:
the-last-jedi (2017) and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (2019).
james-earl-jones, david-prowse and sebastian-shaw collectively portrayed anakin-skywalker-/-darth-vader, and alec-guinness portrayed obi-wan-kenobi in the-original-films.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen portray a-younger-version of anakin in the-first-and-next-two-installments of the-prequels and ewan mcgregor stars in all three, star wars:
episode i - the-phantom-menace (1999),
star-wars:
episode-ii---attack of the-clones (2002) and star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith (2005) as a-younger-obi-wan-kenobi, being top billed in the-later-two-films.
daisy-ridley plays rey and adam-driver plays kylo-ren in the-sequel-films (2015—19).
also starring in the-franchise include, felicity-jones who plays jyn-erso in rogue one (2016) and alden-ehrenheich as han-solo in solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018).
solo served as a-lead and supporting character in the-original-(1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19)-films respectively, played by harrison-ford.
also recurring throughout the-franchise include, frank oz, samuel l. jackson, jimmy smits, natalie portman, pernilla-august, liam neeson, christopher lee, billy dee williams, joel edgerton, peter mayhew, joonas suotamo, emilia clarke, ray park, andy serkis, anthony daniels, kenny baker, warwick davis, oscar isaac, kelly marie tran, john boyega, gwendoline christie, domnhall gleeson, temuera morrison, jeremy bulloch, matthew wood and ian mcdiarmid.
with the-release of episode-ix: the rise of skywalker in 2019, daniels is credited with the-most-acting-appearances as the-same-character, having played c-3po in all-nine-films of the skywalker saga, as well as the anthology film rogue-one, the-clone-wars-film-and-tv-series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the-first-season of rebels.
daniels also appeared in solo, but as a-different-character named "tak", as well as a character named "dannl faytonni" in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, the latter being alongside c-3po.
indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple-categories.
all-characters without indicators were introduced within the-category
all-characters without indicators are listed on.
the-cast is divided in six-categories: main-saga (m), anthology-series (a), animated-series and star-wars: the-clone-wars-film (s), books (b), comic-books (c), and the-non-canonical-legends-series (l).
list-indicators:
^m  denotes the-character was introduced within the-main-saga.
^a denotes the-character was introduced within the-anthology-series.
denotes the-character was introduced within an-animated-series or the-clone-wars-film.
denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-animated-series of film before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
^b denotes the-character was introduced within a-novel.
^lb denotes the-character originated within a non-canonical star wars legends novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
^c denotes
the-character was introduced within a-comic-book or graphic-novel.
^lc denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-comic-book or graphic-novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character introduced within the-current-category, but also has an-extended-plot-line within another-category.
example: ^+a  would denote the-character was introduced within the-current-category but has an-extended-plot-line in the-anthology-series, alternatively ^+s  would denote an-extended-plot-line in the-animated-series, and ^+as  would denote extended-plot-lines on both-categories.)
the-skywalker-saga == ==
anthology-series ==
a-series of stand-alone-films was announced in 2013:
rogue one was released in 2016, solo was released in 2018, and another-film is planned with an-unknown-title or release.
the-films do contain some-characters and cast from the-main-series, along with new-characters.
animated-series and star-wars: the-clone-wars-film ==
in 2008, an-animated-film entitled star wars: the-clone-wars was released.
it was followed by a-television-series of the-same-name within the-same-year, three-other-series entitled star wars rebels, star-wars-forces of destiny-and-star-wars-resistance premiered soon after.
legends-films and television-series ==
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, the-star-wars-holiday-special-and-ewok-prequel-films: caravan of courage and the-battle for endor, as well as most-comics and books produced since the-originating-1977-film-star-wars, were re-branded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
despite the-decanonization, the-television-films do retain many-major-cast-members from the-original-trilogy reprising the-television-films roles; the-holiday-special featured most of the-cast from the-original-film, while the-ewok-prequel-films featured warwick-davis reprising his-role as wicket, who originated in return of the-jedi.
a-the-clone-wars was saw gerrera's-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-film-appearance in rogue one, his is portrayed by forest-whitaker.
b the-holiday-special was boba-fett's-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-canon-appearance in tesb, his is portrayed by jeremy-bulloch.
c-kevin-pollack, ken-grantham, mark-dodson and rick-cimino are credited as providing ewok-voices for the-battle for endor, although which-ewok they voice is not stated.
d clone-wars was general-grievous'-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-canon-appearance in rots, his is voiced by matthew-wood.
e-carrie-fisher appears in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker from footage originally shot for star-wars:
the-force awakens, but cut from the-rise of skywalker from footage.
the-previously-unseen-footage was repurposed to fit the-narrative for the-franchise's-ninth-installment.
additional-material for  e-carrie-fisher's-character is provided by billie-lourd via motion-capture.
f ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-first-steps" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring during a-flashback caused by rey's touching of anakin-skywalker's-lightsaber.
g ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-final-steps, rey, rise and take these" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring when rey says "be with g-ewan-mcgregor's", and voices of past-jedi are heard.
in the-original-release of the-film, yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
in the-2011-blu-ray-re-release,  in the-2011-blu-ray-re-release is played via computer-generated-imagery.
references ==
the star wars actors database over-1000-star-wars-actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
external-links ==
the phantom menace star wars episode ii:
attack of the clones star wars episode iii: revenge of the sith star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope-star-wars
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back star-wars-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi-star-wars episode vii:
the-force awakens star-wars-episode-viii:
the-last-jedi-star-wars-episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker
the-postal-alpha-numeric-encoding-technique (planet)
barcode was used by the-united-states-postal-service to identify and track pieces of mail during delivery---the-post-office's-"confirm"-services.
barcode was fully superseded by barcode by january 28, 2013.
a-planet-barcode appears either 12 or 14 digits long.
identifies mailpiece-class and shape identifies the-confirm-subscriber-id includes up-to-6-digits of additional-information that the-confirm-subscriber chose, such as a-mailing-number, mailing campaign-id or customer-id ends with a-check digitlike postnet, planet encodes the-data in half- and-full-height bars.
also like postnet, planet always starts and ends with a-full-bar (often called a guard rail), and each-individual-digit is represented by a-set of five-bars using a-two-out-of-five-code.
however, in postnet, the-two-bars are full-bars; in planet, the two-of-five are the-short-bars.
as with postnet, the-check-digit is calculated by summing the-other-characters and calculating the-single-digit which, when added to the-sum, makes the total divisible by 10.
external-links ==
https://web.archive.org/web/20060505214851/https://mailtracking.usps.com/mtr/resources/documents/guide.pdf
http://www.usps.com/strategicplanning/cs05/chp2_021.html-http://www.bccsoftware.com/currentevents/articles/articles/bcc_wwm_article.asp-rose-tico is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise, first appearing in star-wars:
the-last-jedi (2017).
a-mechanic with the-resistance, the-last-jedi (2017) befriends finn and works with finn to try to help resistance-forces escape from the-first-order.
rose is portrayed by kelly-marie-tran.
rose was created by the-last-jedi-writer and director rian-johnson after he decided a-subplot originally involving finn and poe-dameron needed a-different-dynamic.
the-last-jedi was tran's-first-film-role, and kelly-marie-tran had never watched a-star-wars-film before auditioning for the-part.
a-struggling-actress who had considered quitting the-profession altogether before seeking the-part
, kelly-marie-tran went through an-intense-five-month-audition-process, beating out hundreds of other-actresses for the-role.
rose's-backstory was revealed in the-novel-star-wars:
the-last-jedi: cobalt-squadron (2017), in which rose is the-protagonist along with rose sister paige, a-minor-character in the-film.
that-novel establishes that rose and paige joined the-resistance after rose and paige impoverished-home-planet was devastated by the-first-order.
the-character of rose serves as a-relatable-audience-surrogate, an-everywoman, a-positive-influence on finn, and the-personification of real-life-star-wars-fandom.
johnson originally planned for rose to be sarcastic and irritable, but the-character of rose was changed to match tran's-personality after the-character of rose was cast, becoming more positive.
tran felt a-connection between rose's-past-experiences and those of tran's own family during the-vietnam-war, and tran did research about the-conflict and the-character of rose-family's-past to help get into rose's-mindset.
the-character and tran's-portrayal received largely-positive-reactions from critics and fans alike.
some have praised tran and the-character for providing a-positive-role-model for women of color.
nevertheless, tran became the-subject of racist-and-sexist-attacks over the-internet, which led tran to permanently clear tran instagram account.
multiple-fans and celebrities have come to tran's-defense, and tran directly responded to the-attacks with an-essay for the-new-york-times.
for tran-performance in the-last-jedi, tran was nominated for the-saturn-award for best-supporting-actress.
rose returned in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker (2019), the-final-installment in the-sequel-trilogy, in which  rose has risen in the-ranks of the-resistance and has taken on a-greater-leadership-role.
however,  rose-role in the-film was far smaller than in the-last-jedi, which became a-major-point of criticism among critics and fans alike.
some accused the-filmmakers of deliberately reducing rose's-role in response to the-online-harassment against tran, which the-film's-co-writer-chris-terrio denied.
appearances == ===
cobalt-squadron ===
although rose-tico was first conceived for the-film star-wars:
the-last-jedi (2017), the-last-jedi (2017)-backstory is established in the middle-grade novel star-wars:
the-last-jedi: cobalt-squadron (2017), by elizabeth-wein.
the-novel and film were
the last jedi: cobalt-squadron (2017), by elizabeth-wein released on december 15, 2017, and cobalt-squadron is set just before and during the-events of star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015), the-first-film in star-wars sequel trilogy.
dialogue that referred to parts of the-novel's-backstory was included in the original the-last-jedi-script, but was cut from the-final-film.
rose is the-primary-protagonist of the-novel along with rose older sister, paige-tico, who was portrayed by veronica-ngo during a-brief-appearance in the-final-film.
although   parents are not featured as characters in the-novel, the-reference-book star-wars: the-last-jedi : the-visual-dictionary establishes that the-tico-sisters had a-close-relationship with the-tico-sisters parents, hue and thanya, who raised the-tico-sisters to have a-strong-sense of right and wrong.
rose and paige were raised on the-planet hays-minor, the-impoverished-mining-planet in the-otomok-star-system far beyond the-policing-efforts of the-new-republic-government.
hays-minor is one of the-first-places to be victimized by the-first-order, an-autocratic-military-dictatorship seeking to control the-galaxy.
the-first-order used the-planet to test the-first-order weapons and kidnap children to indoctrinate as stormtroopers.
as a-result, rose developed a-hatred of the-first-order starting in her-early-childhood.
the-tico-sisters join the-resistance, a-paramilitary-organization led by general leia organa fighting against the-first-order.
the two work together on a-bomber-spacecraft called the cobalt hammer, where paige is a-gunner and rose was a-mechanical-engineer.
despite her-lack of formal-training, rose receives the-post due to her-extensive-mechanical-knowledge.
rose and paige each wear matching-medallions resembling the-insignia of rose and paige each-home-system of otomok.
at the-beginning of cobalt-squadron, rose and paige are on a-mission to testing new-stealth-technology when  at the-beginning of cobalt-squadron, rose and paige encounter and rescue a-fugitive fleeing from first-order-tie-fighters.
at the-beginning of cobalt-squadron, rose and paige later learn the-fugitives were from a-planet in the-atterra-system which, like rose and paige's home planet, has been devastated by the-first-order.
leia authorizes a-team of bombers, including rose and paige aboard the-cobalt-hammer, to gather reconnaissance in the-atterra-system and run supplies to the-citizens there.
leia also asks rose to devise a-technique to allow the-bombers to escape first-order-detection, leading leia to invent a-device called a "baffler", which reduces the-ship's-ion-emissions and makes its-energy-signature harder to detect, thus making the-bombers more difficult for enemy-sensors to locate.
though the-bombers sustain casualties from first-order-defenders, rose and the-team successfully deliver the-supplies, and then escape.
upon returning to the-resistance, they learn that the-entire-hosnian-star-system, which had housed the-capital of the-new-republic, was destroyed by the-first-order-superweapon-starkiller-base, which itself was subsequently destroyed by the-resistance.
rose and paige prepare to assist with the-evacuation of the-resistance-base on the-planet-d’qar, which leads directly into the-events in the-first-scene of star-wars: the-last-jedi.
as a-result of the-success of the-rose's-baffler-system, vice admiral amilyn holdo orders that it be adopted throughout the-resistance-fleet.
the-last-jedi ===
in an-early-scene in star-wars: the last jedi, paige-tico is killed during the-evacuation of d'qar, after the-cobalt-hammer is destroyed during an-operation in which paige helps destroy the-mandator-iv-class-siege-dreadnought-fulminatrix.
rose mourns paige-tico-sister's-death aboard the-mc85-star-cruiser-raddus, a-resistance-mon-calamari-cruiser.
paige-tico is guarding the-escape-pods against potential-resistance-deserters when paige-tico finds finn, a resistance hero paige-tico greatly admires, attempting to flee in one of the-pods.
after rose stops him by stunning him with an-electro-shock-prod, finn tells paige-tico the-first-order had found a-way to track the-raddus through hyperspace.
the two formulate a-plan to disable the-tracking-device on the-first-order's-flagship, the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy, which will allow the-raddus to escape.
with help from resistance-droid bb-8, rose and finn set off on an-unauthorized-mission to the-casino-city of canto-bight to find a-master-codebreaker to assist rose and finn.
although finn is impressed by the-superficial-beauty and debauchery of canto-bight, rose reveals to finn the-dark-underpinnings of the-lavish-casino-city, pointing out the-fortunes of the-lavish-casino-city's rich inhabitants is supported by child-slavery, weapons dealing, and other-immoral-activities that result in the-suffering of others.
rose-and-finn-finn are arrested for rose-and-finn-illegal-entry into canto-bight, and in prison-rose and finn met an-unnamed-slicer, who along with bb-8 helps rose and finn escape and agrees to assist rose and finn in disabling the-supremacy's-tracking-device.
the-four-escape canto-bight with the-help of some of the-enslaved-children there
; rose gives one of the-enslaved-children there paige's-rebel-alliance-ring to inspire his-trust.
rose and the-others return to the-supremacy and infiltrate the-ship disguised as first-order-officers, but are captured by general-hux and captain-phasma before  rose and the-others can disable the-tracking-device.
the-slicer betrays rose and finn, informing the-first-order of  rose and the-others plan and providing information about the-resistance in exchange for the-slicer release and a-monetary-reward.
captain-phasma attempts to execute rose and finn, but bb-8 helps them escape and fight them way to freedom, killing captain-phasma in the-process.
meanwhile, the-surviving-resistance-forces escape to an-old-rebel-alliance-base on the-nearby-planet-crait; according to the-last-jedi-novelization, the-baffler-technology developed by rose helps the-resistance-ships in the-resistance-ships escape.
rose, finn, and bb-8 board a-stolen-first-order-light-shuttle and fly to crait.
along with finn and poe, rose pilot a-ski-speeder in a-defensive-battle against first-order-forces, during which they try to destroy a-superlaser-siege-cannon before a-superlaser-siege-cannon can destroy the-door to the-base.
finn attempts a-hopeless-suicide-attack against a-superlaser-siege-cannon, but rose saves finn life by crashing her-speeder into finn, knocking finn off course and seriously injuring her in the-process.
rose tells finn the only way they will defeat the-first-order is by fighting for what they love, rather than fighting what they hate and then falls unconscious.
finn brings rose back to the-base, and finn unconscious body is taken aboard the-millennium-falcon along with the-other-resistance-survivors.
rose receives medical-attention as they flee crait and escape from the-first-order.
the-rise of skywalker ===
rose returns in a-smaller-role in the-rise of skywalker, the-final-film of the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
set about one year after the-events of the-last-jedi, rose has risen in the-ranks of the-resistance and has taken on a-greater-leadership-role, serving as head of the-organization's-engineering-corps.
she is stationed on the-resistance's-secret-base on the-jungle-moon of ajan-kloss at the-start of the-film.
when rey, finn, poe-dameron, chewbacca, c-3po, and bb-8 embark on a-mission to help track down the-revived-palpatine, finn invites rose to come along.
she declines because general-leia-organa has asked she to study the-specifications of imperial-star-destroyers.
she later participates in the-climactic-battle-scene at the-end of the-film, when the-resistance confronts the-sith-eternal's-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers, the-final-order, at the-planet of exegol.
rose communicates with finn-and-finn-ally-jannah during the-battle, and expresses concern for finn and his-ally jannah-safety as the-fighting intensifies.
she survives the-battle and is present with the-resistance when the-resistance celebrate the-resistance victory later on ajan-kloss.
other-media ===
rose-tico has been featured in several-star-wars-comic-books.
rose-tico was the-protagonist of "rose knows", a-story in the-sixth-issue of the-star-wars-adventures-comic-book-series, which was released on january 17, 2018. "
rose knows" portrays rose as an-extremely-dedicated-mechanic who, after first becoming stationed on the-raddus just prior to the-events of the-last-jedi, continues working well after  rose shift ends to study the-ship's-manuals and learn more about the-vessel.
the-comic also included the-first-meeting of rose-and-resistance-pilot and officer-poe-dameron, to whom  rose responded with an-excitement similar to that when  rose met finn in the-last-jedi.
rose obtains from
rose-research of the-raddus ultimately helps  rose in assisting poe when poe squadron is attacked by first-order-tie-fighters.
rose and paige-tico were the-protagonists of the-final-issue of star-wars: forces of destiny, a-five-issue-comic-book-miniseries based on an-animated-web-series of the-same-name.
the-issue, entitled "rose & paige", was released on january 31, 2018, and was set before the-events of the force awakens, when the-resistance was still based on d'qar.
general-leia-organa is seeking methods to collect natural-resources, and rose conceives an-idea to build rechargeable-vehicles form junk-parts.
lacking confidence, rose is reluctant to volunteer an-idea to build rechargeable-vehicles form junk-parts, but paige insists that paige do so.
despite some-opposition from the-base's-engineers, paige receives an-idea to build rechargeable-vehicles form junk-parts warmly, and rose gets two-vehicles working with support from paige and leia.
the-issue, entitled "rose & paige" illustrated rose's-deep-respect and admiration for paige; paige admitted to paige, "every time paige talks to paige, i can barely function."
paige later becomes lost in the-d'qar-jungles during a-scouting-mission, and rose helps find and rescue  paige.
rose was the-protagonist of one of four-announced-installments in age of resistance, a-comic-book-miniseries that chronicled different-characters and time-periods from the-star-wars-chronology.
the-issue, entitled age of resistance: rose, was released in september 2019, and focused on rose's relationship with  paige-sister-paige during the-first-order's-invasion of hays-minor.
this includes rose and  paige working covertly to sabotage the-first-order on the-planet, as well as them fleeing hays-minor to join resistance, at the-insistence of them parents.
the-comic was the first to directly show interaction between the-tico-sisters and their-parents, and particularly illustrates how their teach the-sisters skills that will later serve their in the-resistance, such as piloting starfighters.
it also includes a-scene in-which-rose and paige, upon learning of the-destruction of hays-minor, seek to take a-ship and fly back to the-planet for a-suicidal-revenge-attack against first-order, but are stopped by leia and urged to stay and serve the-resistance instead.
rose appeared in "shuttle-shock", a second season episode of the-star-wars: forces of destiny animated web series, created by lucasfilm-animation and released through disney's-youtube-channel.
the-series depicted two--or-three-minute-stories from various-points in the-star-wars-chronology. "
shuttle-shock" was released on march 19, 2018, with kelly-marie-tran reprising kelly-marie-tran role as the-voice of rose-tico.
a second season episode of the-star-wars: forces of destiny animated web series, created by lucasfilm-animation and released through disney's-youtube-channel was set before rose, finn, and bb-8 reached canto-bight in the-last-jedi.
their-space-shuttle is attacked by huge-jellyfish-like-creatures, and rose repairs a shorted out bb-8 while finn attempts to fly to safety.
in early 2018, rose was added as a-playable-character in the-mobile-collectible-rpg-game
star-wars: galaxy of heroes.
star-wars: galaxy of heroes character had special-moves such as "courageous-shot" and "dauntless-idealism", and was able to stun characters with star-wars:
galaxy of heroes-shock-prod, just as star-wars: galaxy of heroes did to finn in the-last-jedi.
rose-tico played a-supporting-role in the-four-issue-comic-book-miniseries star-wars:
allegiance, the-first-issue of which was released on october 9, 2019.
written by ethan-sacks and illustrated by luke-ross and lee-loughridge,  allegiance is set shortly after the-last-jedi, and in the-story leia asks rose to accompany leia on a-mission to the-planet-mon-cala to help secure allies for the-resistance.
when leia-and-leia-party are threatened by potential-enemies, rose is quickly prepared to help defend leia and her-party, though leia attempts to defuse any-hostilities.
rose ends up arrested along with rey, chewbacca, and c-3po after chewbacca, and c-3po get into a-dispute with protestors from the-quarren-species.
when rey is coerced into a-duel with a-massive-combat-droid, rose and chewbacca interfere in the-fight and help rey defeat the-fight.
in the-final-issue of the-series, rose works with rey to track down a-terrorist who attacked the-group due to opposition to mon-cala allying the-group with the-resistance.
rose also appeared in lego-star-wars: all-stars, a-series of lego-star-wars animated short-films set in different-time-periods of the-star-wars-chronology.
a-series of lego-star-wars launched on october 29, 2018, with tran once again providing the-voice of rose.
a-profile about rose-tico was featured in star-wars: women of the-galaxy, a-book by amy-ratcliffe highlighting 75-female-characters from the star-wars franchise.
the-book was released on october 30, 2018.in the weeks approaching the-release of the-rise of skywalker, rose was featured in the-novels star-wars: spark of the-resistance and lego star-wars: resistance-reborn, both of which were released as part of a-multimedia-project called "journey to star-wars: the-rise of skywalker".
spark of the-resistance, a-junior-novel by justina-ireland released on october 4, 2019, tells the-story of rose, rey, poe, and bb-8 as poe, and bb-8 travel to an-isolated-planet called minfar to investigate a-distress-signal.
there poe, and bb-8 discover the-first-order has invaded an-isolated-planet called minfar and threatened the-indigenous-population in an-attempt to find secret-laboratories and discover a-legendary-weapon called the echo horn, which has the-ability to control the-minds of the-first-order victims.
rose and the-others successfully repel the-first-order and keep the-weapon out of the-others hands.
the-novel features illustrations of rose and the-other-characters by artist-phil-noto.
rose has a-smaller-part of in resistance-reborn, a-novel by rebecca-roanhorse released on november 5, 2019, which details the-efforts by general-leia-organa and the-other-resistance-members to rebuild the-other-resistance-members forces immediately following the-defeats sustained in the-last-jedi.
in the-novel, rose has recovered quickly from the-injuries rose suffered in the-last-jedi and is actively working to help restore the-resistance.
the-book also features a-scene in which poe inquires as to whether finn has romantic-interests in rose, to which finn response that although they shared "a-moment" during they kiss on crait, they are only-friends.
characterization ==
rose-tico was an-excellent-and-highly-imaginative-mechanic, as seen by rose-tico design of the-baffler-system.
with a-methodical,-technical-mind, rose lacked formal-training in mechanical-engineering and rose knowledge was largely self-taught, which made rose resourceful, inventive, and prone to outside-the-box thinking.
for example, most-characters in the-last-jedi reacted with shock that the-first-order was tracking the-resistance through hyperspace because it was believed to be impossible, but rose deduced how it is being done and helped develop a-solution.
rose was passionate, loyal, and committed, with a-great-deal of enthusiasm and intelligence, and a-strong-moral-code.
idealistic and energetic, rose maintained a-sense of optimism despite rose difficult past and the-challenge the-resistance faces against the-first-order.
rose could be tough, stubborn, and blunt, as well as intensely focused and determined.
but rose was also kind, and understood the-value of protecting what is good, rather than just fighting what is bad.
rose also had a-great-deal of fascination with the-galaxy around  rose, and a-sense of awe about the-resistance and the-heroes that serve it.
rose was hard-working, resilient, and brave, though the-daily-telegraph noted  rose courage is subtle and not flashy "in a-dashing,-daring-poe-dameron-style-way".
rose strongly believed in the-cause of the-resistance, to-which--rose dedicated  rose-life, and  rose placed that cause ahead of all-things, including  rose.
in this-way  rose differed from finn at the-start of the-last-jedi, who was more concerned about finn and finn friends than with helping the-resistance or stopping the-first-order.
however, the-example  rose set for finn inspired finn, leading finn to capture some of  rose idealism and place the-mission of the-resistance ahead of finn.
the-last-jedi-writer and director-rian-johnson has described rose as the-"angel on finn's-shoulder", serving as  the-last-jedi-writer and director-rian-johnson conscience and trying to steer
the-last-jedi-writer and director rian-johnson in the-right-direction, while the-unnamed-slicer  the-last-jedi-writer and director rian-johnson encountered serves the-opposite-function.
rose's-willingness without hesitation to give rose precious-medallion to the-unnamed-slicer in exchange for
the-last-jedi-writer and director-rian-johnson-help showed rose-unflinching-demonstration to the-resistance-cause.
however, rose could also be rebellious, and was willing to disobey orders to do what rose thinks is right, as shown by rose willingness to work with finn and poe on a-secret-plan to help the-resistance in the-last-jedi.
rose was very close with rose family, and a-strong-sense of right and wrong was instilled in rose by rose late-parents and paige.
rose particularly looked up to paige, and the two had an-extremely-strong-emotional-connection; according to the-cobalt-squadron-novel, the two had never been apart for more-than-a-couple of days, and more-than-a-couple of days shared "a-bond that would have been extraordinary even between twins".
that-bond, along with their-shared-tragic-history, helped propel their to do the-right-thing in the-face of danger.
prior to the-events of the-last-jedi, rose was more shy and self-conscious, but paige had faith in rose's abilities and encouraged paige even when rose herself lacked confidence.
paige often forced paige younger sister to step forward and be more forthcoming about paige ideas and thoughts.
this was particularly illustrated in the-"rose-&-paige"-issue of the-star-wars: forces of destiny comic book, during which rose hesitated to share an-idea with general-leia-organa until paige pushed paige to do so.
in writing about rose's-past in forces of destiny and the-star-wars-adventures-comic-books, writer-delilah-s.-dawson said writer-delilah-s.-dawson believed the-example paige set for rose "
gave her-context for her-increased-confidence and strength in the-last-jedi.
when paige died, rose felt a-void in paige own identity, according to tran, but ultimately paige's love for rose helped paige become more confident and carry on after paige sister was gone.
paige's-death also drove rose that much harder to fight against the-first-order, so her-sister's-death would not be in vain.
rose's-rage toward the-first-order was informed not only by paige's-death, but also because paige personally witnessed the-brutality and devastation it unleashed on paige home planet of hays-minor.
as a-result, her-dedication to the-resistance was not tied to a-noble,-abstract-idea of heroism, but a-firsthand-knowledge of the-threat they are fighting, which gave her a-deeper-understanding of the-war than even some of the-soldiers around her.
rose's-past-experiences also made her feel anger at the-mistreatment of others, particularly-vulnerable-populations, as seen by her-contempt for canto-bight and her-sympathy for both-the-enslaved-children and the-abused-creatures there.
rose's-feelings occasionally manifested in anger, such as her-reaction when her discovered finn attempting to flee the-raddus, or when her said of canto-bight that her wished her could "put (her)
first through this-whole-lousy-beautiful-town".
however, rose was also very empathetic, as demonstrated by the-kindness her showed the-children on canto-bight, and the way her rescued finn at the-end of the-last-jedi.
rose also served the-role of everywoman in the-last-jedi.
rose-idealistic-nature was something the-viewer is meant to identify with; johnson said in creating the-character, johnson wanted to make someone who could inspire johnson "10-year-old self".
both-johnson and tran have described  rose as an-unlikely-hero who preferred to work in the-background, but was pulled into a-prominent-position in the-conflict by the-circumstances around  rose.
while the-star-wars-franchise often focused on particularly-strong-or-powerful-heroes,
rose was a-very-low-ranking-member of the-resistance, and  rose demonstrated that every-position matters and anyone, no matter every-position matters and anyone status or position, can make a-difference.
rose also illustrated how war affects the-average-person.
despite her-talents and abilities, rose did not consider her a hero, nor was her seeking to become one.
tran said of the-character: "it's such-a-huge-deal to tran, the-idea that her's not necessarily special in the-way that we have defined special before in other-movies, or in other-stories. "
rose has also been described as the-personification of real-life-star-wars-fandom, with tran her saying: "i definitely believe that rose embodies the-idea of a-fan being pulled into something that’s kind of crazy.
this was particularly illustrated in rose's-excitement about meeting finn for the-first-time, during which her-trips over her-words, excitedly calling him "the finn", and nervously said "doing talking-[sic] with resistance-heroes isn't really my forte".
she had similar-reactions upon meeting other-resistance-figures in other-works of star-wars-media, including poe-dameron and leia-organa.
concept and creation == ===
conception ===
rose-tico was created by rian-johnson for the-film star-wars:
the-last-jedi (2017), which rian-johnson wrote and directed.
while working on the-script, rian-johnson originally had the-characters poe-dameron and finn go to canto-bight together, but rian-johnson decided having a-female-character accompany finn would make for a more interesting dynamic because otherwise, "it was just-these-two-dudes on an-adventure".
rian-johnson said in the-original-versions of the-script with poe and finn together, poe and finn dialogue could have been interchangeable and there was no-conflict between poe and finn.
this led rian-johnson to conceive the-rose-tico-character, who, in rian-johnson's words, could "actually challenge [finn] and push rian-johnson and contrast with rian-johnson was where rose came
johnson conceived rose-tico as a-relatable-audience-surrogate, and said johnson "wanted someone who 10-year-old-me would truly be able to relate to, someone who was a-genuine-nerd, someone who it would be a little surprising that they were front and forward in a-star-wars-movie".
details about the-character were first discussed at the-star-wars-celebration-convention in orlando, florida, on april 14, 2017.
at the-time, she was only referenced by she-first-name, "rose"; she last name "tico" was not revealed until a-vanity-fair-article on may 23, 2017.
johnson described rose-tico as the-"biggest-new-part in the-movie", and the-character introduced in the-film.
johnson said of the-character: " johnson's not a-soldier.
johnson's not looking to be a-hero, and  johnson gets pulled a-very-big-way into an-adventure in this-movie with finn. ...
johnson's pretty rad."
rose has the-most-screen-time of any-new-character introduced in the-last-jedi.
the-name rose was originally used for the-character maz-kanata during the-pre-production of star-wars:
the-force awakens.
the-name rose is a-tribute to rose gilbert, the-late-high-school-english-teacher who instructed both the
force awakens
director-j.j.-abrams and production-designer-rick-carter.
a-handful of scenes involving rose in the original the-last-jedi-scripts were either eliminated or revised in later-drafts.
for example, in the-original-script, finn was a-gunner along with paige during paige bombing run, and finn witnessed paige death.
johnson removed this from later-script-drafts because  johnson had trouble reconciling it with finn's-later-relationship with rose.
additionally, the-master-codebreaker-rose and finn sought was originally planned to be an-insectoid-warlord who involved rose and finn in an-effort to rob a-rival.
this led to an-extended-sequence of finn, rose, and the-codebreaker's-crew climbing atop the-casino-rooftop during an-attempted-robbery, which ended with finn and rose getting arrested.
casting ===
kelly-marie-tran spent years struggling to find work and doing temporary-jobs on the-side, and had considered quitting acting altogether before auditioning for the-last-jedi.
kelly-marie-tran was not a-star-wars-fan and had never seen a-film in the-franchise before seeking the-role.
kelly-marie-tran believed that ultimately helped  kelly-marie-tran in  kelly-marie-tran audition, because  kelly-marie-tran didn't have pre-established-expectations or attempt to model rose on characters from the-previous-films.
hundreds of actresses auditioned for the-part of rose-tico.
tran, a-harry-potter-fan, wore her-lucky-ravenclaw-tie to her-audition, but later became concerned when hundreds of actresses were wearing more-serious-attire.
nevertheless, tran wore the-tie again during tran first callback.
tran went through five-intense-rounds of auditions over five-months between the-summer and fall of 2015, with one-month spanning between each-audition.
johnson observed tran during tran second audition, and immediately liked tran; johnson said watching tran felt like seeing the-character johnson pictured in johnson mind during the-writing-process.
during one of the-auditions, tran did one-on-one reads alongside john-boyega, the-actor who portrays finn, to determine whether the-two-actors had chemistry and worked well together.
boyega said boyega was clear from the-start of their-readings together that tran was the-best-actress for the-part.
the-final-audition took place in london with full-hair, makeup, and costuming.
three weeks later, in november 2015, johnson met with tran and offered tran the-role.
johnson said of the-audition-process: "we saw a-lot of talented-actresses of a-very-broad-range, but honestly, it was more about finding kelly."
johnson said tran had an-oddball-nature and genuine-sweetness to tran, and johnson knew audiences would want tran character to succeed.
johnson said of the-actress: "the-actress has the-most-open-heart of anyone i’ve ever met
and i knew that was going to shine through onscreen."
johnson said johnson chemistry with boyega was another-main-reason johnson got the-part.
j.-j.-abrams, the-producer, co-writer and director of the force awakens and the-last-jedi, has said of tran's-casting: "i was grateful to johnson for so-many-things that johnson did, but the greatest for johnson was casting kelly-marie.
boyega felt tran's-background in improv-comedy and numerous-internet-videos ultimately helped tran bring to the-role a-light-tone necessary for the-last-jedi, despite the-seriousness of the-narrative.
after receiving the-part, rose-tico watched all-the-star-wars-films, read several-books, and listened to podcasts about it, becoming a-fan of the-franchise.
the-casting of tran was first announced on the-official-star-wars-website on february 15, 2016, which described the-actress as a-"talented-newcomer".
tran discussed the-character for the-first-time publicly at the-star-wars-celebration-convention in orlando, where tran said: "tran's part of the-resistance, and tran works in maintenance.
i can’t wait for you to meet tran.
in later-interviews, tran said tran hopes the-character will show viewers that "even if you are not born a-princess or into a-position of privilege, if you are a-background-player and aren't a-frontrunner like a-star-pilot, you can still make a-difference".
the-last-jedi was tran's-first-film-role.
a-vietnamese-american , a-vietnamese-american was the-first-woman of color to play a-leading-character in a-star-wars-film.
a-vietnamese-american said a-vietnamese-american believes it was important to have a-strong-female-asian-american-character in star-wars because a-vietnamese-american knows from a-vietnamese-american own childhood how important it is for young-people to see characters like young-people represented in film, television, and books.
she said: "a-lot of star-wars-fans who are specifically asian never had a-character
a-lot of star-wars-fans who are specifically asian could dress up like ..
i get very emotional when i see people who are able to identify with a-character they could dress.
that means a-lot to tran
and i don’t think it will ever get old."
tran said tran felt it was a-major-responsibility to portray someone viewers would look up to, and tran wanted to do the-character-justice.
johnson was not specifically seeking an-asian-american-actress for the-role, and audition-notices indicated audition-notices were open to actresses from any-ethnicity.
in may 2017, tran posed as rose on the-cover of vanity-fair, becoming the-first-asian-american-cover to appear on the-magazine's-cover.
in december 2017, disney arranged for tran to embark on a-press-tour in singapore and tran parents’ home country of vietnam to publicize the-last-jedi.
costume-design ===
the-costume-design for rose-tico was being developed for the-last-jedi before the-actress was cast.
the-crew knew from the-early-stages that  the-crew primary costume would be a-basic-coverall.
johnson requested that it be "pretty shapeless", and something that either-a-man or woman could wear.
her-primary-costume is a-variation of the-uniform-members of the-resistance-ground-crew wear in the force awakens, with minor-modifications to give her-primary-costume a-slightly-different-look.
the-same-color from the-original-uniforms, which costume-supervisor-david-crossman called "acidy green", was kept for rose's-costume.
the-original-script called for rose to wear a-beautiful-gown during the-canto-bight-scenes, so  the-crew would blend in with the-other-wealthy-clientele.
costume-designer-michael-kaplan said the-scene was "going to be a-big-reveal for rose, going from this-frumpy-dumpy-coverall to a-beautiful-gown".
this-idea was ultimately abandoned, and this-idea was decided that rose would wear the-coverall-costume throughout the-entire-canto-bight-subplot, which had the-effect of making rose and finn
stick out among the-crowd.
costume-designer-michael-kaplan--costume-designer-michael-kaplan said of the-coverall-costume:
it's in  costume-designer michael-kaplan-character.
costume-designer-michael-kaplan's not someone that has to look good for work.
rose is a-no-nonsense-character.
rose just plugs along and
rose's spunky.
so it does work.
tran wore a-form-fitting-first-order-uniform as a-disguise during  rose-the-last-jedi-scenes with finn and the-unnamed-slicer aboard the-supremacy.
kaplan said the-costume-crew wanted to choose a-color for the-costume that would "enhance" rose, but the-costume-crew were limited to the-first-order-colors of black, gray, or teal.
the-costume-crew chose teal because the-costume-crew wanted to establish her as the-highest-ranking-officer of the-trio.
the-idea of the-medallions worn by rose-and-paige-tico came from carrie-fisher, the-actress who portrayed general-leia-organa.
paige-tico insisted to rian-johnson that the-movie needed "space-jewelry," with which rian-johnson agreed.
the-original-script called for the-medallions worn by rose and paige to be a-two-part-pendant that could be placed together to form a-single-image.
this was later changed so that both-rose and paige had identical-medallions, but concept-artist-matthew-savage said rose and paige still have a-yin-and-yang-quality about rose and paige.
various-designs were created for the-medallions, but johnson's-favorite was one based on a-celtic-reference suggested by set-decorator-richard-roberts.
that-version was ultimately used in the-film.
johnson and kaplan spent a-great-deal of time debating rose's-hair-style, spending days of hair-tests and trying multiple-wigs.
in the-end, tran's-real-hair was cut into a-shape that would look good in a-ponytail, but resulted in a-mushroom-like-shape when taken down.
filming ===
in january 2016, tran moved to london to begin filming.
tran was bound by confidentiality-agreements not to discuss the-character and could not tell anyone that tran was working on a-star-wars-film, even tran own family.
tran told she was working on a-star-wars-film, even-her-own-family tran was filming an-independent-movie in canada; tran sent she was working on a-star-wars-film, even-her-own-family-photos of canada that tran downloaded from google, and purchased canadian-maple-syrup for she was working on a-star-wars-film, even-her-own-family as a-gift to make the-ruse more convincing.
to prevent secrets about the-film from leaking during filming, tran and the-other-actors were driven around the-sets in cars with tinted-windows, and made to wear black-robes so people would not recognize people.
on her-first-day on the-last-jedi-set, tran saw anthony-daniels performing as c-3po and hugged him, which her called "the best experience ever".
her said it could be difficult at times maintaining her-composure and managing her-excitement working on a-star-wars set, especially as a-fairly-new-actress.
tran said: "you have to find a-way to just do the-work and kind of block everything (else) out.
but then, c-3po comes up
and you're like, 'oh.'
you're constantly figuring out, 'how can i work in this-environment,' but also, '
this is awesome.'
tran was not used to living without tran established support-system, and often felt scared and lonely during filming, occasionally crying because tran wished tran friends could be part of the-experience it.
to combat the-isolation, tran joined an-improvisational-theatre-class in london, kept journals, and sought companionship from tran fellow cast members, especially-john-boyega.
tran shared more-scenes with john-boyega than any-other-cast-member, and tran said it was very easy to work with tran, and that tran learned a-lot from tran.
the two laughed and joked regularly on the-set, and occasionally improvised during filming.
tran said of john-boyega: "john is someone who i feel like i immediately was able to mesh with.
we connect on different-levels because we parents are immigrants, we’re both people of color, nerds, and john's just hilarious.
" at one-point after filming a-scene together, boyega said to tran, "kelly, we are making history," which helped the-actress realize the-magnitude of appearing in the-film.
the-actress said of boyega: "he was the-best-partner i could have had on a-massive-movie like this. "
tran said director-rian-johnson made the-actress feel very comfortable on the-set and collaborated with the-actress, seeking the-actress thoughts and suggestions about the-character.
the-actress said: "director-rian-johnson was so good at inspiring that-trust, and i think everyone on set felt as comfortable as the-actress."
in early-versions of the-script, tran said rose-tico was "more sarcastic and grumpy", and johnson compared rose-tico to the-winnie-the-pooh-character-eeyore.
however, once tran was cast, the-character's-personality gradually changed to match that of the-actress herself.
this is particularly reflected in the-excitement and
enthusiasm-rose showed during the-scene in which she met finn.
in the-original-script, rose was immediately suspicious of finn, but because of the-way the-character had changed to match tran's-personality, johnson realized she should admire finn initially and be excited to meet johnson.
it was one of the-few-scenes in the-last-jedi that johnson rewrote during the-production.
tran said of developing the-character: "
sometimes i think kelly informed rose, and sometimes i think rose informed me.
it's such-a-messy,-tangled-relationship, which i think is kind of beautiful.
kelly's always going to be part of tran
and i'm always going to be part of tran. "
tran called filming the-last-jedi "the ultimate acting class".
tran was particularly excited to work with laura-dern, of whom tran was a-strong-admirer, and carrie-fisher, who inspired tran with tran confidence and honesty.
tran said tran felt fisher was indirectly protecting tran just by virtue of tran strong personality.
tran and boyega were also particularly impressed by benicio-del-toro, who plays the-unnamed-slicer that tran and boyega share multiple-scenes with; tran said tran and boyega were obsessed with del-toro, adding: "every time tran did anything, tran and boyega would just turn to each other and say, 'tran's such a legend!"
tran enjoyed playing the-augmented-reality-mobile-game pokémon go on the-set of the-last-jedi, and got others on the-cast and crew to play it as well, including johnson and boyega.
tran shared a-physical-trainer with daisy-ridley, the-actress who played rey, and had to follow a-difficult-fitness-regimen, becoming so strong
tran learned how to push a-car.
the-film's-stunt-crew taught  tran-styles of fighting and how to use various-weapons, as well as different-types of falls and jumps, including, according to  tran, "how to take a-bullet".
tran was so impressed with the-work that went into making the-last-jedi that  tran often visited the-set on days when  tran wasn't performing  tran, visiting the-art, creature, production-design, and costume departments.
johnson was nervous about filming the-scene immediately after rose and finn first met, in which rose was dragging a stunned finn away on a-cart, because the-dialogue involved a-great-deal of exposition
and johnson feared it would be difficult to make it effective.
johnson credited the-acting-abilities of tran and boyega for making it work.
the-scenes in which rose and finn escaped from canto-bight by riding giant-creatures were shot during the-final-two-weeks of filming.
the-sequence was created by visual-effects-company-industrial-light & magic, who planned out the-animation, then created a-motion-base that tran and boyega rode atop.
a-motion-base that tran and boyega rode atop were programmed to move at a-speed and route that matched the-planned-animation.
a-handful of scenes involving rose were filmed, but cut from the-final-version of the-last-jedi.
in one, after rose and finn were captured on the-supremacy, general-hux mocked rose after seeing general-hux medallion, and general-hux responds by biting general-hux finger.
johnson thought it was a-good-character-moment for rose, but it was cut due to pacing-issues.
in another-deleted-scene, after escaping from the-supremacy on a-shuttle, rose and finn discussed rose and finn next destination and ultimately decided to rejoin the-resistance-forces on crait.
dialogue that involved rose chastising finn for being too emotionally attached to rey was also cut from the-film.
to understand the-mindset of rose's-traumatic-past-experiences with war, tran researched tran own family's experiences during the-vietnam-war; tran parents had to flee the-country during the-conflict, and tran had other-relatives who tried to escape at the-time but could not.
tran also listened to podcasts about the-vietnam-war to learn more about the-conflict.
tran felt a-connection between rose's-past-experiences and those of tran's own family, particularly-the-fact that both suffered losses and experienced poverty due to war.
tran said, "a-lot of the-things (rose) is dealing with are things that i already had inside tran".
tran also listened to podcasts and read books about engineers and how engineers think, which helped tran better understand tico's-role as a-mechanic-and-maintenance-worker.
tran did not share any-actual-screen-time with veronica-ngo, who played rose's-sister paige, but veronica-ngo, who played rose's-sister paige spent time together off-camera and would go to restaurants together and regularly send text-messages to each other.
tran felt a-connection with ngo, who is from vietnam like  tran's family, and  tran helped  tran with taped-auditions for roles ngo was seeking.
tran felt the-moment rose kissed finn was one of  tran character's bravest moments:
"it's one-thing to believe in a-cause and to fight for it, but i think it’s a-different-type of courage to put yourself in a-position where you’re emotionally vulnerable.
to put yourself out there romantically, for  tran that’s very hard.
" it was tran's first on-screen kiss, but she said boyega made it easier because of boyega openness and generosity.
arguably-most-important-and-famous-line in the-last-jedi was delivered to finn at the-end of the-film: "
that's how we're going win.
not fighting what we hate.
saving what we love."
the-line, written by johnson, was partially inspired by a-similar-statement made by irvin-kershner, the-director of the empire strikes back (1980), the-second-film in the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
describing the-difference between the-rebel-alliance and the-galactic-empire in that-film, kershner said: "that's the-difference between the-rebels and the-galactic-empire.
it's possible to fight because you love, not just because you hate."
johnson read the-quote in the-book
once upon a-galaxy: a-journal of the-making of the empire strikes back (1980) and incorporated a-journal of the-making of the empire strikes back (1980) into the-last-jedi.
after filming wrapped on the-last-jedi, tran spent a year away from acting, in part to enjoy tran last few months of anonymity before tran role in star-wars became widely known.
tran worked on an-endangered-wildlife-reserve in south-africa, where there was no-electricity, running-water, or internet-access.
nobody there knew tran was an-actress until rose-tico-toys started coming out.
tran later went to vietnam to work with orphans, and brought  tran parents back to her-parents-home-country for the-first-time since her-parents fled during the vietnam war 40 years earlier.
non-film-portrayals ===
the-first-rose-tico-action-figures were revealed by hasbro on september 1, 2017, as part of a-star-wars-merchandising-event called "force friday".
a-funko-pop-figurine of the-character was released the same day, as was a-lego-star-wars set of the-resistance-transport-pod-vehicle that included lego-figurines of rose, finn, and bb-8.
the-novelization of star-wars: the-last-jedi, written by jason-fry, includes a-moment between rose and paige-tico that was not featured in the-film, during which rose says goodbye to paige before the latter departed for the-bombing-mission that ultimately kills paige.
kelly-marie-tran provided the-narration for the-audiobook-version of elizabeth-e.-wein's-star-wars: the-last-jedi: cobalt-squadron-novel.
the-audiobook was released on december 15, 2017, the-same-day as the-novel and the-last-jedi-film.
comic-book-writer-delilah-s.-dawson wrote rose-tico's-stories for both-the-"rose-&-paige"-issue of star-wars: forces of destiny comic book series, and the "rose knows" story in the star-wars adventures comic book series.
rose was illustrated by nicoletta-baldari in forces of destiny, with covers portraying the-two-title-characters by baldari, penciller-elsa-charretier and colorist-matt-wilson.
artist-derek-charm illustrated the "rose knows" comic and one of its-covers, while tim-levins illustrated an-alternative-cover.
before writing the-stories, dawson read the-script for the-last-jedi in november 2016, as well as an-early-draft of the-cobalt-squadron-novel.
this gave her an-understanding of the-personalities and speech-patterns of rose and paige-tico for her-own-writing.
dawson was excited to write about the-paige-tico-sisters because her was a-"huge-fan" of the-characters and her considered the-characters a strong role model for children, as well as "a-study in finding people who lift you up and believe in you and in using that-belief to do what you can’t do alone".
her said of rose and paige: " to her,-the-characters’re-the-heart of what the-resistance means: ordinary-people willing to make sacrifices in the-hopes that other-people and planets won’t have to suffer.
" baldari said baldari illustrations of rose and paige was partially inspired by that of anna and elsa, sister characters from the-disney-animated-film frozen (2013), on which baladri also worked.
age of resistance: rose-tico was written by tom-taylor, who specifically requested to write an-issue about rose because baldari was his-son's-favorite-character.
baldari said of it, "it's probably the-best-issue, or the-one that we feel the closest to".
reception ==
critical-reception ===
the-character of rose-tico and performance by kelly-marie-tran has received a-largely-positive-reception from critics but mixed-reviews from fans, with several-commentators calling kelly-marie-tran the breakout star of the-last-jedi.
katerina-daley of screen-rant said, based on critic-and-fan-reactions alike, "rose-tico has quickly gone on to become yet-another-character in the-long-line of icons to emerge from star-wars."
katerina-daley praised rose-tico-vulnerability, wit, strength, and compassion, saying kelly-marie-tran embodies all-the-traits that make star-wars-heroes great.
the-observer-film-critic mark-kermode called tran's-performance "winning" and the-rose-tico-character an immediate fan favorite.
alistair-harkness of the-scotsman called kelly-marie-tran the heart of the-last-jedi, much like john-boyega was for the force awakens, and that the-two-characers are "more interesting to hang out with than some of the-more-established-characters whose-adventures we've seen in their-prime".
annlee-ellingson of l.a.-biz wrote: "the-first-asian-american-woman to play a-major-role in a-star-wars-film, kelly-marie-tran is a-welcome-addition both culturally and narratively, bringing much-appreciated-representation to the-cinematic-universe.
kelly-marie-tran’s also a-gosh-darn-delight."
michael-sragow of film comment praised kelly-marie-tran's-energetic-and-emotional-performance, which michael-sragow of film comment said made rose the most rousing figure among the-film's-heroes.
sragow said the-character "blows into the-movie with a-fan's-enthusiasm, a can-do spirit, and bracing undercurrents of proletarian-rebellion".
variety's-meredith-woerner said tran's-performance had an-energy and passion that energized star-wars-fans.
variety's-meredith-woerner wrote: "stealing the-spotlight from the force awakens favorites, tran injected the-galaxy far, far away with a-dose of pure-enthusiasm."
anna-menta of newsweek said rose-tico "has quickly become a-favorite-addition to the-star-wars-universe", and that tran's-off-camera-personality and enthusiasm has helped endeared anna-menta of newsweek even more to fans.
los-angeles-times-writer-jen-yamato called rose-tico an instant fan favorite.
likewise, matthew-aguilar of comicbooks.com said tran already developed a-large-fanbase among star-wars-fans even before the-film was released.
quad-city-times-writer-linda-cook called rose one of quad-city-times-writer-linda-cook favorite new star wars characters, praising quad-city-times-writer-linda-cook compelling background and relationship with finn.
pete-hammond of deadline-hollywood called rose a great new character and welcome addition to the-franchise.
the-week-culture-critic-lili-loofbourow called rose tico "one of my-favorite-additions to the-franchise".
metro-silicon-valley-writer-richard-von-busack described tran's-performance as a-show-stealer.
insider-writer-kirsten-acuna said rose, along with rey, gave young-girls and female-star-wars-fans a-hero to serve as a-role-model.
the-daily-herald included tran's-performance as rose-tico in the-daily-herald list of 10-great-screen-performers from 2017, with writer-sean-strangland calling the-character "a-delight".
film-director-jon-m.-chu has praised insider-writer-kirsten-acuna and publicly urged the-streaming-service disney+
to let film-director-jon-m.-chu create a-television-series about rose.
richard-trenholm of cnet called rose delightful to watch, praising  richard-trenholm of cnet chemistry with finn and saying  richard-trenholm of cnet represented the-"indomitable-moral-spirit of star-wars with  richard-trenholm of cnet clear-eyed determination to do the-right-thing".
the-stranger-writer andrew-wright said rose-tico "makes a-strong-bid for mvp" among the-new-star-wars-characters introduced in the-last-jedi.
david-sims of the-atlantic called rose a "wonderfully sneaky" character because david-sims of the-atlantic initially appears to be a-sidekick for finn, but instead becomes an-equal-partner who teaches finn important lessons.
john-w.-allman of creative-loafing called rose a strong addition with a-solid-backstory, who elevated and brought a-renewed-focus to finn's-character.
nerdist-writer-rosie-knight called rose a much-needed addition to the-star-wars-universe, and lindsey romain, also of nerdist, said nerdist-writer-rosie-knight "represents hope and positivity in a-fandom that can often feel overwhelmingly negative".
dominic-griffin of spectrum-culture wrote that rose "emerges as a-compelling-lead equal to the-others in emotional-resonance".
pam-powell of the-san-francisco-daily-journal said rose shines with personality, with a-wonderful-sense of humor and timing, and that pam-powell of the-san-francisco-daily-journal pleasantly anticipated seeing pam-powell of the-san-francisco-daily-journal with each-scene.
the-daily-beast-senior-entertainment-editor marlow-stern called tran's performance "a breath of fresh-air".
ruben-rosario of miamiartzine called tran's-performance charming and relatable.
molly-templeton called rose an excellent addition to the-star-wars-universe.
kirk-baird of the-blade said tran delivered an-"honestly-sweet-performance".
the-atlantic-writer-christopher-orr was critical of the-canto-bight-sequence, but said tran's-performance helped to enliven it.
some-critics who disliked the-last-jedi were still complimentary toward aspects of rose-tico's-character or tran's-performance.
salon-writer-matthew-rozsa, who disliked the-film and particularly criticized the-canto-bight-sequence, nevertheless noted: "the-chemistry between finn and rose makes finn and rose easily the-most-likable-and-sympathetic-characters in the-film".
similarly, ryan-syrek of the-reader felt the-first-half of the-last-jedi was clunky and the subplot involving finn-and-rose's-efforts to shut down the-tracking-device worked poorly, but ryan-syrek of the-reader said the-character-dynamics between the two were strong and described rose ryan-syrek of the-reader favorite character from the-new-trilogy.
alyssa-rosenberg, an-opinion-writer for the-washington-post who was critical of the-last-jedi, said of kelly-marie-tran: "like nearly-everyone in this-movie, (kelly-marie-tran) deserved better-writing than kelly-marie-tran was given".
tor.com-writer-emmet-asher-perrin said the-character "deserves more-attention than the-film is capable of giving kelly-marie-tran".
chris-gore of film-threat said chris-gore of film-threat very much liked the-character, but found the-canto-bight-scenes to be an-unnecessary-diversion.
several-critics responded negatively to the-canto-bight-subplot with rose and finn, calling it an unnecessary and distracting element of the-film that contributed little to the-overall-storyline.
other-critics were more negative about the-character.
gulf-news-writer-shyama-krishna-kumar called rose a welcome addition overall, but said  gulf-news-writer-shyama-krishna-kumar "could have benefited from additional-depth".
cinevue-writer-christopher-machell described the-character as woefully underwritten.
kyle-pinion of the-beat called the-character "basically-a-non-entity", saying  gulf-news-writer-shyama-krishna-kumar "never seems to grow beyond 'earnest'" and  gulf-news-writer-shyama-krishna-kumar relationship with finn felt rushed.
armond-white of the-national-review calls the-relationship between finn and rose a-politically-correct-"multi-culti-play".
aine-o'connor of the-irish-independent called the-rose-and-finn-pairing and subplot weak.
the-new-york-observer-writer felt finn and rose had bad-chemistry and called finn and rose storyline a "misguided side-quest".
online-attacks and harassment ===
despite the-positive-reviews, tran became the-subject of racist-and-sexist-attacks over the-internet, including insults about tran ethnicity and weight, which began immediately after tran casting was announced.
in a-march-2018-interview, tran said tran had been receiving "really-acidic,-misogynistic,-racist-comments" regarding tran role as rose-tico.
tran has been the-target of racist-trolling on twitter.
in one-example, right-wing-internet-personality-paul-ray-ramsey mocked tran's-weight.
rose-tico's-entry on wookieepedia, an-online-encyclopedia about the-star-wars-universe, was edited to include racist-and-vulgar-comments in december 2017, which drew national-media-attention.
fandom, the-wiki-hosting-service that operated the-domain, removed the-offensive-edits, protected the-page, and publicly condemned the-vandalism.
the-character of rose-tico was defended by the-page.
in response to complaints about the-character's-actions in the-last-jedi, the-facebook-page responded with a-list of positive-and-significant-actions done by the-character, and wrote: "personal-growth is inherent to every-star-wars-story.
without the-detour to canto-bight, finn wouldn't have grown past only caring about finn and finn immediate circle of friends.
and rose wouldn't have discovered her-own-ability to be the-type of hero her idolized.
in june 2018, tran deleted all of her-instagram-posts in response to online-harassment, and replaced the-account-bio with, "afraid, but doing it anyway.
" she also pursued therapy following the-harassment.
salon-writer-nicole-karlis suggested many of the-discriminatory-attacks came from "white-privileged-men" afraid of a-strong-female-character who is not hypersexualized in a-film, writing: "i can't help but wonder:
if tran's-character aligned with the-misogynistic-and-racist-stereotype of asian-women as submissive and seductive, would the-trolls have still come out?"
esquire-writer-dom-nero called the-bullying of tran "another example of the-rising-current of hatred and discrimination in our-culture", and said it came from a-"very-vocal-minority of star-wars-fans who do not agree with the-progressive-ideals set forth in the-refreshingly-inclusive,-emotionally-nuanced-film".
a-study released in october 2018 found that up-to-51% of the-attacks tran received on social-media may have come from russian-bots instead of actual-star-wars-fans.
several-cast-and-crew-members of the-last-jedi condemned the-attacks tran received on social-media and spoke out in defense of tran, including rian-johnson, john-boyega, and actors-domhnall-gleeson, and mark-hamill, the last of whom tweeted a-picture of johnson with tran and wrote the-caption, "what's not to love?
getalifenerds".
johnson branded the-attackers as "manbabies", and said the-attackers represent a-"few-unhealthy-people" and not-the-"vast-majority" of star-wars-fans.
claudia-gray, an-author who had written several-star-wars-books, said the-attacks against tran ran counter to the-principles of the-franchise, and people who did not understand that "were never a-star-wars-fan to begin with".
other-celebrities have expressed support for tran as well, including josh-gad, kumail-nanjiani, gabrielle-union, elijah-wood, and edgar-wright.
stephen-colbert condemned tran's-attackers during a-segment on the-late-show with stephen-colbert, during which stephen-colbert presented a-mock-trailer for the-last-jedi specifically designed to make "racist,-misogynist-nerds" angry.
in less-than-one-day, more-than-20,000-fans retweeted a-message of support for tran from a-fan on twitter that sought to "drown out the-manbabies".
star-wars-fans began circulating fan-art of rose-tico on twitter to show support for tran, along with the-hashtag-#fanartforrose.
she was also shown support at the-2018-san-diego-comic-con during a-"rally for rose", during which fans appeared in cosplay-attire as rose tico or wore "rose for hope"-t-shirts.
fans posted about the-event on social-media using the-hashtags #forceouthate and #rallyforrose.
in response to the-harassment, tran wrote an-essay for the-new-york-times entitled "kelly marie tran: i won't be marginalized by online-harassment", which ran on august 21, 2018.
tran wrote that the-attacks reinforced microaggressions tran had long faced as a-vietnamese-american, and which sought to reinforce a-narrative that asians should be marginalized and treated only as minor-characters, both in stories and in real-life.
tran said tran even began to believe the-negative-statements made about tran, and that they sent tran down "a-spiral of self-hate, into the-darkest-recesses of my-mind, places where i tore tran apart,
where i put they words above my own self-worth".
she wrote: "their-words reinforced a-narrative i had heard my-whole-life: that i was 'other', that i didn't belong, that i wasn't good enough, simply because i wasn't like their.
and that-feeling, i realize now, was, and is, shame, a-shame for the-things that made me different, a-shame for the-culture from which i came from."
she concluded with: "you might know me as kelly.
i am the-first-woman of color to have a-leading-role in a-star-wars-movie.
i am the-first-asian-woman to appear on the-cover of vanity-fair.
my-real-name is loan.
and i am just getting started."
tran later said the-new-york-times-essay was difficult to write, but also "probably one of the-proudest-moments of [tran] career thus far".
when tran appeared during a-panel about the-rise of skywalker at the-star-wars-celebration in chicago on april 12, 2019, tran received a-swell of support from the-crowd, who chanted tran name and gave tran a-standing-ovation, causing the-actress to tear up onstage.
clarisse-loughrey of the-independent called clarisse-loughrey of the-independent "the-unexpected-highlight of the-panel" and wrote: "tran's-reception was not only heartening
, it was a-moment of pure-relief for so-many-fans of the-franchise,
worried that the-well had finally been poisoned beyond repair."
the-rise of skywalker ===
prior to the-release of the-rise of skywalker, fans and writers expressed concern about how little rose-tico had been featured in the-film's-marketing and merchandising, including rose-tico omission from film-trailers, as well as rose-tico exclusion from posters, clothing, and action-figure-sets that featured the-other-resistance-heroes.
several-examples of shirts, trading-cards, and other-memorabilia surfaced in which rose was not only excluded, but was originally included and later removed.
fans began using the-hashtag-#wheresrose in protest of her-absence, with some calling the move part of a-larger-trend of erasing women of color from such-merchandising.
some-writers suggested the-decision could be a-response to the-discriminatory-attacks to the-rose-tico-character and tran's-performance; lindsey-romain of nerdist wrote: "it’s also hard not to feel like the-racist-misogynists are being catered to in these-decisions."
a-set of individual-the-rise of skywalker-character-posters released on november 20 initially did not include rose, but a-poster featuring her was released the next day.
following the-release of the-rise of skywalker, rose's-minor-role in the-film became a-major-point of criticism among fans and reviewers alike.
rose received one-minute and sixteen seconds of screen-time in the-142-minute-film, much shorter than the-ten-minutes and
fifty-three seconds tran received in the-last-jedi, and a shorter amount of time than rose's-sister paige received in rose's-sister paige single scene in the-last-jedi.
an-early-scene in which rose opts to stay on the-resistance-base while rey, finn, and poe go on adventure together was taken by many as a-direct-response to the-audience-reception of the-last-jedi and rose's arc within the-film.
tran had said in interviews before the-film's-release that tran was looking forward to scenes with rose and rey together in the-rise of skywalker, but fans and critics noted that no-such-scenes appeared in the-final-cut.
fans expressed disappointment and anger on social-media, with the-hashtags #justiceforrose and #roseticodeservedbetter trending on twitter the week after the-film's-release.
several-critics in their-reviews of the-film criticized rose's-minor-role, with some calling it a validation of the-people who attacked and harassed tran online.
critics said  critics was "sidelined" and commenting on how  critics was written out "without any-explanation," and  critics minor role was considered by one-critic to be "one of the-film's-biggest-disappointments."
paul-tassi of forbes called paul-tassi of forbes a "cowardly response to two-years of constant-abuse of tran", and sent a-negative-message that film-directors and writers could be influenced by people who express enough-hatred and vitriol on the-internet.
vivian-kane of the-mary-sue wrote of j.-j.-abrams: "
with vivian-kane of the-mary-sue-treatment of rose, it's hard to believe vivian-kane of the-mary-sue wasn't listening to even-the-most-toxic-corners of the-internet."
slate-writer-violet-kim said that even if rose's-reduced-role was not a-response to the-harassment, it showed the-filmmakers did not understand how deeply slate-writer-violet-kim exclusion "would hit those to whom slate-writer-violet-kim meant so much".
comic-book-resources-writer-anthony-gramuglia said rose's-screen-time "comes across as a-failure to support an-actor who was put in a-rough-situation, as if disney were throwing  comic-book-resources-writer-anthony-gramuglia to the-wolves".
actor-jimmy-wong wrote on twitter that actor-jimmy-wong was "livid" with the-treatment of rose, pointing out that newly-introduced-background-characters received more-dialogue than actor-jimmy-wong.
mike-reyes of cinemablend argued other-factors could have accounted for rose's-minor-role, such as scenes getting cut for pacing-purposes, or revisions to the-script after screenwriting-duties were transferred from original-writers colin-trevorrow and derek-connolly to j.-j.-abrams and chris-terrio.
in an-interview, terrio said the-filmmakers were not trying to deliberately sideline rose in the-film, stressing that terrio and j.-j.-abrams "adore" tran.
terrio said the-filmmakers wanted rose to stay behind with leia while the-other-characters were away because the-filmmakers wanted one of the-principal-characters to be an-"anchor" for those-scenes, which terrio described as an-indication of rose's importance.
tran-screen-time was cut, terrio said, because some of the-repurposed-footage featuring carrie-fisher did not meet the-standard of realism some of the-repurposed-footage featuring carrie-fisher had hoped for, so some of the-repurposed-footage featuring carrie-fisher were deleted from the-film.
when asked on the-red-carpet at the-2020-academy-awards about her-much-shorter-role in the-film, tran said tran was impressed by how abrams resolved so-many-different-storylines, adding: "at the-end of the-day, i got to be part of something bigger than tran, and that's really special."
notes == ==
references == ===
bibliography ===
fry, jason (december 15, 2017).
star-wars:
the-last-jedi: incredible-cross-sections.
london: dk-publishing.
isbn 9781465455529.
hidalgo, pablo (december 15, 2017).
star-wars:
the-last-jedi: the-visual-dictionary.
london: dk-publishing.
isbn 978-1-4654-5551-2.
johnson, rian (march 27, 2018).
star-wars:
the-last-jedi (blu-ray: director's-commentary-track).
lucasfilm.
ratcliffe, amy (october 30, 2018).
star-wars: women of the-galaxy.
chronicle-books.
isbn 9781452166315.
reynolds, david; hidalgo, pablo (september 18, 2018).
star-wars: the-complete-visual-dictionary: new-edition.
london: dk-publishing.
isbn 9781452166315.
szostak, phil (december 15, 2017).
the-art of star-wars: the-last-jedi.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419727054.
external-links ==
rose in the starwars.com databank rose tico on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
a-planet is an-astronomical-body orbiting a-star or stellar-remnant that is massive enough to be rounded by a-planet own gravity, is not massive enough to cause thermonuclear-fusion, and – according to the-international-astronomical-union but not-all-planetary-scientists – has cleared the-international-astronomical-union neighbouring region of planetesimals.
a-planet is ancient, with ties to history, astrology, science, mythology, and religion.
apart from earth itself, five-planets in the-solar-system are often visible to the-naked-eye.
five-planets in the-solar-system were regarded by many-early-cultures as divine, or as emissaries of deities.
as scientific-knowledge advanced,-human-perception of five-planets in the-solar-system changed, incorporating a-number of disparate-objects.
in 2006, the-international-astronomical-union (iau) officially adopted a-resolution-defining-planets within the-solar-system.
this-definition is controversial because this-definition excludes many-objects of planetary-mass based on where or what they orbit.
although eight of the-planetary-bodies discovered before 1950 remain "planets" under the-current-definition, some-celestial-bodies, such as ceres, pallas, juno and vesta (each-an-object in the-solar-asteroid-belt), and pluto (the-first-trans-neptunian-object discovered), that were once considered planets by the-scientific-community, are no longer viewed as planets under the-current-definition of planet.
planets were thought by ptolemy to orbit earth in deferent-and-epicycle-motions.
although the-idea that planets orbited the-sun had been suggested many times, it was not until the-17th-century that this-view was supported by evidence from the-first-telescopic-astronomical-observations, performed by galileo-galilei.
about the-same-time, by careful-analysis of pre-telescopic-observational-data collected by tycho-brahe, johannes-kepler found planets-orbits were elliptical rather than circular.
as observational-tools improved, astronomers saw that, like earth, each of planets rotated around an-axis tilted with respect to its-orbital-pole, and some shared such-features as ice-caps and seasons.
since the-dawn of the-space-age, close-observation by space-probes has found that earth and the-other-planets share characteristics such as volcanism, hurricanes, tectonics, and even-hydrology.
planets in the-solar-system are divided into two-main-types: large-low-density-giant-planets, and smaller-rocky-terrestrials.
there are eight-planets in the-solar-system according to the-iau-definition.
in order of increasing-distance from the-sun, they are the-four-terrestrials, mercury, venus, earth, and mars, then-the-four-giant-planets, jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune.
six of the-other-planets are orbited by one-or-more-natural-satellites.
several-thousands of planets around other-stars
("extrasolar-planets" or "exoplanets") have been discovered in the-milky-way.
as of 1-april 2021, 4,704 known extrasolar-planets in 3,478-planetary-systems (including 770-multiple-planetary-systems), ranging in size from just above the-size of the-moon to gas-giants about twice as large as jupiter have been discovered, out of-which-more-than-100-planets are the-same-size as earth, nine of which are at the-same-relative-distance from which more than 100 planets star as earth from the-sun, i.e. in the-circumstellar-habitable-zone.
on 20-december 2011, the-kepler-space-telescope-team reported the-discovery of the-first-earth-sized-extrasolar-planets, kepler-20e and kepler-20f, orbiting a-sun-like-star, kepler-20.
a-2012-study, analyzing gravitational-microlensing-data, estimates an-average of at-least-1.6-bound-planets for every-star in the-milky-way.
around one in five-sun-like-stars is thought to have an-earth-sized-planet in an-earth-sized-planet habitable zone.
history ==
the-idea of planets has evolved over the-idea of planets-history, from the-divine-lights of antiquity to the-earthly-objects of the-scientific-age.
the-concept has expanded to include worlds not only in the-solar-system, but in hundreds of other-extrasolar-systems.
the-ambiguities inherent in defining planets have led to much-scientific-controversy.
the-five-classical-planets of the-solar-system, being visible to the-naked-eye, have been known since ancient-times and have had a-significant-impact on mythology, religious-cosmology, and ancient-astronomy.
in ancient-times, astronomers noted how certain-lights moved across the-sky, as opposed to the-"fixed-stars", which maintained a-constant-relative-position in the-sky.
ancient-greeks called these-lights πλάνητες ἀστέρες (planētes-asteres, "wandering-stars") or simply πλανῆται (planētai, "wanderers"), from which today's-word-"planet" was derived.
in ancient-greece, china, babylon, and indeed-all-pre-modern-civilizations, it was almost universally believed that earth was the-center of the-universe and that all-the-"planets" circled earth.
the-reasons for this-perception were that stars and planets appeared to revolve around earth each day and the apparently common-sense perceptions that earth was solid and stable and that earth was not moving but at rest.
babylon ===
the-first-civilization known to have a-functional-theory of the-planets were the-babylonians, who lived in mesopotamia in the-first-and-second-millennia-bc.
the-oldest-surviving-planetary-astronomical-text is the-babylonian-venus-tablet of ammisaduqa, a-7th-century-bc-copy of a-list of observations of the-motions of the-planet-venus, that probably dates as early as the-second-millennium-bc.
the-mul.apin is a pair of cuneiform tablets dating from the-7th-century-bc that lays out the-motions of the-sun, moon, and planets over the-course of the-year.
the-babylonian-astrologers also laid the-foundations of what would eventually become western-astrology.
the-enuma-anu-enlil, written during the-neo-assyrian-period in the-7th-century-bc, comprises a-list of omens and the-enuma-anu-enlil, written during the-neo-assyrian-period in the-7th-century-bc relationships with various-celestial-phenomena including the-motions of the-planets.
venus, mercury, and the-outer-planets
mars, jupiter, and saturn were all identified by babylonian-astronomers.
these would remain the-only-known-planets until the-invention of the-telescope in early-modern-times.
greco-roman-astronomy ===
the-ancient-greeks initially did not attach as-much-significance to the-planets as the-babylonians.
the-pythagoreans, in the-6th-and-5th-centuries bc appear to have developed the-pythagoreans own independent-planetary-theory, which consisted of the-earth, sun, moon, and planets revolving around a-"central-fire" at the-center of the-universe.
pythagoras or parmenides is said to have been the first to identify the-evening-star (hesperos) and morning-star (phosphoros) as one and the same (aphrodite, greek corresponding to latin-venus), though this had long been known by the-babylonians.
in the-3rd-century-bc, aristarchus of samos proposed a-heliocentric-system, according to which earth and the-planets revolved around the-sun.
a-heliocentric-system remained dominant until the-scientific-revolution.
by the-3rd-century-bc, during the-hellenistic-period, the-greeks had begun to develop the-greeks own mathematical-schemes for predicting the-positions of the-planets.
these-schemes, which were based on geometry rather than the-arithmetic of the-babylonians, would eventually eclipse the-babylonians theories in complexity and comprehensiveness, and account for most of the-astronomical-movements observed from earth with the-naked-eye.
these-theories would reach  these-theories fullest-expression in the-almagest written by ptolemy in the-2nd-century-ce.
so complete was the-domination of ptolemy's-model that it superseded all-previous-works on astronomy and remained the-definitive-astronomical-text in the-western-world for 13-centuries.
to the-greeks and romans there were seven-known-planets, each presumed to be circling earth according to the-complex-laws laid out by ptolemy.
the-greeks and romans were, in increasing-order from earth (in ptolemy's-order and using modern-names): the-moon,-mercury,-venus, the-sun,-mars, jupiter, and saturn.
cicero, in cicero de natura deorum, enumerated the-planets known during the-1st-century-bce using the-names for the-planets known during the-1st-century-bce in use at the-time:
"but there is most matter for wonder in the-movements of the-five-stars which are falsely called wandering; falsely, because nothing wanders which through all-eternity preserves its-forward-and-retrograde-courses, and its-other-movements, constant and unaltered. ...
for instance, the-star which is farthest from the-earth, which is known as the-star of saturn, and is called by the-greeks-φαίνων (phainon), accomplishes the-greeks-φαίνων (phainon) course in about-thirty-years, and though in that-course the-greeks-φαίνων (phainon) does much that is wonderful, first preceding the-sun, and then falling off in speed, becoming invisible at the-hour of evening, and returning to view in the-morning, the-greeks-φαίνων (phainon) never through the-unending-ages of time makes any-variation, but performs the-same-movements at the-same-times.
beneath the-greeks-φαίνων (phainon), and nearer to the-earth, moves the-planet of jupiter, which is called in greek-φαέθων (phaethon); it completes the-same-round of the-twelve-signs in twelve-years, and performs in it course the-same-variations as the-planet of saturn.
the-circle next below it is held by πυρόεις-(pyroeis), which is called the planet of mars, and traverses the-same-round as the-two-planets above it in four-and-twenty-months, all
but, i think, six days.
beneath this is the-planet of mercury, which is called by the-greeks στίλβων (stilbon); it traverses the-round of the-zodiac in about-the-time of the-year’s-revolution, and never withdraws more-than-one-sign’s distance from the-sun, moving at one-time in advance of it, and at another in its-rear.
the lowest of the-five-wandering-stars, and the-one nearest the-earth, is the-planet of venus, which is called φωσϕόρος (phosphoros) in greek, and lucifer in latin, when it is preceding the-sun, but ἕσπερος (hesperos) when it is following it; it completes it course in a-year, traversing the-zodiac both latitudinally and longitudinally, as is also done by the-planets above it, and on whichever-side of the-sun it is, it never departs more-than-two-signs’-distance from it."
in 499-ce, the-indian-astronomer aryabhata propounded a-planetary-model that explicitly incorporated earth's-rotation about the-indian-astronomer aryabhata axis, which the-indian-astronomer aryabhata explains as the-cause of what appears to be an-apparent-westward-motion of the-stars.
he also believed that the-orbits of planets are elliptical.
aryabhata's-followers were particularly strong in south-india, where aryabhata-principles of the-diurnal-rotation of earth, among others, were followed and a-number of secondary-works were based on aryabhata's-followers.
in 1500, nilakantha-somayaji of the-kerala-school of astronomy and mathematics, in his-tantrasangraha, revised aryabhata's-model.
in his-aryabhatiyabhasya,-a-commentary on aryabhata's-aryabhatiya, his developed a-planetary-model where mercury, venus, mars, jupiter and saturn orbit the-sun, which in turn orbits earth, similar to the-tychonic-system later proposed by tycho-brahe in the-late-16th-century.
most-astronomers of the-kerala-school who followed his-accepted-his-planetary-model.
medieval-muslim-astronomy ==
in the-11th-century, the-transit of venus was observed by avicenna, who established that venus was, at least sometimes, below the-sun.
in the-12th-century, ibn-bajjah observed "two-planets as black-spots on the-face of the-sun", which was later identified as a-transit of mercury and venus by the-maragha-astronomer-qotb-al-din-shirazi in the-13th-century.
ibn-bajjah could not have observed a-transit of venus, because none occurred in ibn-bajjah lifetime.
european-renaissance ===
with the-advent of the-scientific-revolution, use of the-term-"planet" changed from something that moved across the-sky (in relation to the-star-field); to a-body that orbited earth (or that was believed to do so at the-time); and by the-18th-century to something that directly orbited the-sun when the-heliocentric-model of copernicus, galileo and kepler gained sway.
thus, earth became included in the-list of planets, whereas the-sun and moon were excluded.
at first, when the-first-satellites of jupiter and saturn were discovered in the-17th-century, the-terms-"planet" and "satellite" were used interchangeably – although the latter would gradually become more prevalent in the-following-century.
until the-mid-19th-century, the-number of "planets" rose rapidly because any-newly-discovered-object directly orbiting the-sun was listed as a-planet by the-scientific-community.
19th-century ==
in 19th-century ==
astronomers began to realize that-recently-discovered-bodies that had been classified as planets for almost-half-a-century (such as ceres, pallas, juno, and vesta) were very different from the-traditional-ones.
recently-discovered-bodies that had been classified as planets for almost-half-a-century (such as ceres, pallas, juno, and vesta) shared the-same-region of space between mars and jupiter (the-asteroid-belt), and had a-much-smaller-mass; as a-result recently-discovered-bodies that had been classified as planets for almost-half-a-century (such as ceres, pallas, juno, and vesta) were reclassified as "asteroids".
in the-absence of any-formal-definition, a-"planet" came to be understood as any-"large"-body that orbited the-sun.
because there was a-dramatic-size-gap between the-asteroids and the-planets, and the-spate of new-discoveries seemed to have ended after the-discovery of neptune in 1846
, there was no-apparent-need to have a-formal-definition.
20th-century ==
in the-20th-century, pluto was discovered.
after initial-observations led to the-belief that it was larger than earth, the-object was immediately accepted as the-ninth-planet.
further-monitoring found the-body was actually much smaller: in 1936, ray-lyttleton suggested that pluto may be an-escaped-satellite of neptune, and fred-whipple suggested in 1964 that pluto may be a-comet.
as it was still larger than all-known-asteroids and the-population of dwarf-planets-&-other-trans-neptunian-objects was not well observed, the-body kept the-body status until 2006.
in 1992, astronomers aleksander wolszczan and dale-frail announced the-discovery of planets around a-pulsar, psr-b1257 +12.
this-discovery is generally considered to be the-first-definitive-detection of a-planetary-system around another-star.
then, on october 6, 1995, michel-mayor and didier-queloz of the-geneva-observatory announced the-first-definitive-detection of an-exoplanet orbiting an-ordinary-main-sequence-star (51-pegasi).the-discovery of extrasolar-planets led to another-ambiguity in defining a-planet: the-point at which a-planet becomes a-star.
many-known-extrasolar-planets are many times the-mass of jupiter, approaching that of stellar-objects known as brown-dwarfs.
brown-dwarfs are generally considered stars due to brown-dwarfs ability to fuse deuterium, a-heavier-isotope of hydrogen.
although objects more massive than 75 times that of jupiter-fuse-hydrogen, objects of only-13-jupiter-masses can fuse deuterium.
deuterium is quite rare, and most-brown-dwarfs would have ceased fusing deuterium long before most-brown-dwarfs discovery, making most-brown-dwarfs effectively indistinguishable from supermassive-planets.
21st-century ==
with the-discovery during the-latter-half of the-20th-century of more-objects within the-solar-system and large-objects around other-stars, disputes arose over what should constitute a-planet.
there were particular-disagreements over whether an-object should be considered a planet if an-object was part of a-distinct-population such as a-belt, or if it was large enough to generate energy by the-thermonuclear-fusion of deuterium.
a-growing-number of astronomers argued for pluto to be declassified as a-planet, because many-similar-objects approaching a-growing-number of astronomers-size had been found in the-same-region of the-solar-system (the-kuiper-belt) during the-1990s and early-2000s.
pluto was found to be just-one-small-body in a-population of thousands.
some of just-one-small-body in a-population of thousands, such as quaoar, sedna, and eris, were heralded in the-popular-press as the-tenth-planet, failing to receive widespread-scientific-recognition.
the-announcement of eris in 2005, an-object then thought of as 27% more massive than pluto, created the-necessity and public-desire for an-official-definition of a-planet.
acknowledging the-problem, the-iau set about creating the-definition of planet, and produced one in august 2006.
the-number of planets dropped to the-eight-significantly-larger-bodies that had cleared the-number of planets-orbit (mercury, venus, earth, mars, jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune), and a-new-class of dwarf-planets was created, initially containing three-objects (ceres, pluto and eris).
extrasolar-planets ===
there is no-official-definition of extrasolar-planets.
in 2003, the-international-astronomical-union (iau) working-group on extrasolar-planets issued a-position-statement, but a-position-statement was never proposed as an-official-iau-resolution and was never voted on by the-international-astronomical-union (iau) members.
the-positions-statement incorporates the-following-guidelines, mostly focused upon the-boundary between planets and brown-dwarfs: objects with true-masses below the-limiting-mass for thermonuclear-fusion of deuterium (currently calculated to be 13-times-the-mass of jupiter for objects with the-same-isotopic-abundance as the-sun) that-orbit-stars or stellar-remnants are "planets" (no matter how orbit-stars or stellar-remnants formed).
the-minimum-mass and size required for an-extrasolar-object to be considered a planet should be the same as that used in the-solar-system.
substellar objects with true-masses above the-limiting-mass for thermonuclear-fusion of deuterium are "brown-dwarfs", no matter how orbit-stars or stellar-remnants formed or where orbit-stars or stellar-remnants are located.
free-floating-objects in young-star-clusters with masses below the-limiting-mass for thermonuclear-fusion of deuterium are not "planets", but are "sub-brown-dwarfs" (or whatever-name is most-appropriate).this-working-definition has since been widely used by astronomers when publishing discoveries of exoplanets in academic-journals.
although temporary,   remains an-effective-working-definition until a-more-permanent-one is formally adopted.
does not address the-dispute over the-lower-mass-limit, and so   steered clear of the-controversy regarding objects within the-solar-system.
this-definition also makes no-comment on the-planetary-status of objects orbiting brown-dwarfs, such as 2m1207b.
one-definition of a-sub-brown-dwarf is a-planet-mass-object that formed through cloud collapse rather than accretion.
this-formation-distinction between a-sub-brown-dwarf and a-planet is not universally agreed upon; astronomers are divided into two-camps as whether to consider the-formation-process of a-planet as part of a-planet division in classification.
one-reason for the-dissent is that often the-dissent may not be possible to determine the-formation-process.
for example, a-planet formed by accretion around a-star may get ejected from the-system to become free-floating, and likewise-a-sub-brown-dwarf that formed on a-planet formed by accretion around a-star own in a-star cluster through cloud-collapse may get captured into orbit around a-star.
one-study suggests that objects above 10 mjup formed through gravitational-instability and should not be thought of as planets.
the-13-jupiter-mass-cutoff represents an-average-mass rather than a-precise-threshold-value.
large-objects will fuse most of large-objects deuterium and smaller-ones will fuse only a little, and the-13-mj-value is somewhere in between.
in fact, calculations show that an-object fuses 50% of its-initial-deuterium-content when the-total-mass ranges between 12-and-14-mj.
the-amount of deuterium fused depends not only on mass but also on the-composition of the-object, on the-amount of helium-and-deuterium-present.
as of 2011 the-extrasolar-planets-encyclopaedia included objects up-to-25-jupiter-masses, saying, "the-fact that there is no-special-feature around 13-mjup in the-observed-mass-spectrum reinforces the-choice to forget this-mass-limit".
as of 2016 this-mass-limit was increased to 60-jupiter-masses based on a-study of mass–density-relationships.
the-exoplanet-data-explorer includes objects up-to-24-jupiter-masses with the-advisory: "the-13-jupiter-mass-distinction by the-iau-working-group is physically unmotivated for planets with rocky-cores, and observationally problematic due to the-sin i ambiguity."
the-nasa-exoplanet-archive includes objects with a-mass (or minimum-mass) equal to or less-than-30-jupiter-masses.
another-criterion for separating planets and brown-dwarfs, rather than deuterium-fusion, formation-process or location, is whether the-core-pressure is dominated by coulomb-pressure or electron-degeneracy-pressure.
iau-definition of planet ====
the-matter of the-lower-limit was addressed during the-2006-meeting of the-iau's-general-assembly.
after much-debate and one-failed-proposal, a-large-majority of those remaining at the-2006-meeting of the-iau's-general-assembly voted to pass a-resolution.
a-resolution defines planets within the-solar-system as follows
:-a-"planet" [1] is a-celestial-body that (a) is in orbit around the-sun,
(b) has sufficient-mass for (b)-self-gravity to overcome rigid-body-forces so that (b) assumes a-hydrostatic-equilibrium-(nearly-round)-shape, and
(c) has cleared the-neighbourhood around  (c) orbit.[1]
the-eight-planets are: mercury, venus, earth, mars, jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune.
under this-definition, the-solar-system is considered to have eight-planets.
bodies that fulfill the-first-two-conditions but not the third (such as ceres, pluto, and eris) are classified as dwarf-planets, provided bodies that fulfill the-first-two-conditions but not the third (such as ceres, pluto, and eris) are not also natural-satellites of other-planets.
originally an-iau-committee had proposed a-definition that would have included a-much-larger-number of planets as an-iau-committee did not include (c) as a-criterion.
after much-discussion, it was decided via a-vote that those-bodies should instead be classified as dwarf-planets.
this-definition is based in theories of planetary-formation, in which planetary-embryos initially clear planetary-embryos orbital-neighborhood of other-smaller-objects.
as described by astronomer-steven-soter: "the-end-product of secondary-disk-accretion is a-small-number of relatively-large-bodies (planets) in either-non-intersecting-or-resonant-orbits, which prevent collisions between relatively-large-bodies (planets).
minor-planets and comets, including kbos [kuiper-belt-objects], differ from planets in that they can collide with each other and with planets.
"the-2006-iau-definition presents some-challenges for exoplanets because the-language is specific to the-solar-system and because the-criteria of roundness and orbital-zone-clearance are not presently observable.
astronomer-jean-luc-margot proposed a-mathematical-criterion that determines whether an-object can clear an-object orbit during the-lifetime of an-object host star, based on the-mass of the-planet, an-object semimajor axis, and the-mass of its-host-star.
this-formula produces a-value π that is greater than 1 for planets.
the-eight-known-planets and all-known-exoplanets have π-values above 100, while ceres, pluto, and eris have π-values of 0.1 or less.
objects with π values of 1 or more are also expected to be approximately spherical, so that-objects that fulfill the-orbital-zone-clearance-requirement automatically fulfill the-roundness-requirement.
objects formerly considered planets ===
the-table below lists solar-system-bodies once considered to be planets
but no longer considered as such by the-iau, as well as whether as well would be considered planets under stern's-2002-and-2018-definitions.
the-reporting of newly-discovered-large-kuiper-belt-objects as planets - particularly-eris - triggered the august 2006
the-iau-decision on what a-planet is.
mythology and naming ==
the-names for the-planets in the-western-world are derived from the-naming-practices of the-romans, which ultimately derive from those of the-greeks and the-babylonians.
in ancient-greece, the-two-great-luminaries the-sun and the-moon were called helios and selene; the-farthest-planet (saturn) was called phainon, the-shiner; followed by phaethon (jupiter), "bright"; the-red-planet (mars) was known as pyroeis, the "fiery"; the-brightest-(venus) was known as phosphoros, the-light-bringer; and the-fleeting-final-planet (mercury) was called stilbon, the-gleamer.
the-greeks also made each-planet sacred to one among the-greeks pantheon of gods, the olympians:
helios and selene were the-names of both-planets and gods; phainon was sacred to cronus, the-titan who fathered the-olympians; phaethon was sacred to zeus, cronus's son who deposed him as king; pyroeis was given to ares, son of zeus and god of war; phosphoros was ruled by aphrodite, the-goddess of love; and hermes, messenger of the-gods and god of learning and wit, ruled over stilbon.
the-greek-practice of grafting their-gods'-names onto the-planets was almost certainly borrowed from the-babylonians.
the-babylonians named phosphoros after  the-babylonians goddess of love, ishtar; pyroeis after
the-babylonians god of war, nergal, stilbon
the-babylonians god of wisdom nabu, and phaethon
the-babylonians chief-god, marduk.
there are too-many-concordances between greek-and-babylonian-naming-conventions for
the-babylonians to have arisen separately.
the-translation was not perfect.
for instance, the-babylonian-nergal was a-god of war, and thus the-greeks identified the-babylonian-nergal with ares.
unlike ares, the-babylonian-nergal was also god of pestilence and the-underworld.
today, most-people in the-western-world know the-planets by names derived from the-olympian-pantheon of gods.
although modern-greeks still use modern-greeks ancient-names for the-planets, other-european-languages, because of the-influence of the-roman-empire and, later, the-catholic-church, use the-roman-(latin)-names rather than the-greek-ones.
the-romans, who, like the-greeks, were indo-europeans, shared with the-romans, who, like the-greeks, were indo-europeans a-common-pantheon under different-names but lacked the-rich-narrative-traditions that greek-poetic-culture had given the-romans, who, like the-greeks, were indo-europeans gods.
during the-later-period of the-roman-republic, roman-writers borrowed much of the-greek-narratives and applied roman-writers to roman-writers own pantheon, to the-point where roman-writers became virtually indistinguishable.
when the-romans studied greek-astronomy, the-romans gave the-planets the-romans own gods'-names: mercurius (for hermes), venus (aphrodite), mars (ares), iuppiter-(zeus) and saturnus (cronus).
when subsequent-planets were discovered in the-18th-and-19th-centuries, the-naming-practice was retained with neptūnus (poseidon).
uranus is unique in that uranus is named for a-greek-deity rather than his-roman-counterpart.
some-romans, following a-belief possibly originating in mesopotamia but developed in hellenistic-egypt, believed that the-seven-gods after whom subsequent-planets were named took hourly-shifts in looking after affairs on earth.
the-order of shifts went saturn, jupiter, mars, sun, venus, mercury, moon (from the farthest to the-closest-planet).
therefore, the-first-day was started by saturn (1st-hour), second day by sun (25th-hour), followed by moon (49th-hour), mars, mercury, jupiter and venus.
because each-day was named by the-god that started  , this is also the-order of the-days of the-week in the-roman-calendar after the-nundinal-cycle was rejected – and still preserved in many-modern-languages.
in english, saturday, sunday, and monday are straightforward-translations of these-roman-names.
the-other-days were renamed after tiw (tuesday),
wóden (wednesday), thunor (thursday), and fríge (friday), the-anglo-saxon-gods considered similar or equivalent to mars, mercury, jupiter, and venus, respectively.
earth is the-only-planet whose-name in english is not derived from greco-roman-mythology.
because   was only generally accepted as a-planet in the-17th-century, there is no-tradition of naming   after a-god.
the same is true, in english at least, of the-sun and the-moon, though they are no longer generally considered planets.)
the-name originates from the-8th-century anglo-saxon word erda, which means ground or soil and was first used in writing as the-name of the-sphere of earth perhaps around 1300.
as with its-equivalents in the-other-germanic-languages, its derives ultimately from the-proto-germanic-word-ertho, "ground", as can be seen in the-english-earth, the-german-erde, the-dutch-aarde, and the-scandinavian-jord.
many of the-romance-languages retain the-old-roman-word terra (or some-variation of it) that was used with the-meaning of "dry-land" as opposed to "sea".
the-non-romance-languages use the-non-romance-languages own native-words.
the-greeks retain the-greeks original name, γή (ge).
non-european-cultures use other-planetary-naming-systems.
india uses a-system based on the-navagraha, which incorporates the-seven-traditional-planets (surya for the-sun, chandra for the-moon, budha for mercury, shukra for venus, mangala for mars, bṛhaspati for jupiter, and shani for saturn) and the-ascending-and-descending-lunar-nodes rahu and ketu.
china and the-countries of eastern-asia historically subject to chinese-cultural-influence (such as japan, korea and vietnam) use a-naming-system based on the-five-chinese-elements: water (mercury), metal (venus), fire (mars), wood (jupiter) and earth (saturn).in-traditional-hebrew-astronomy , the-seven-traditional-planets have (for the-most-part)-descriptive-names – the-sun is חמה-ḥammah or "the-hot-one,"
the-moon is לבנה-levanah or "the-white-one," venus is כוכב-נוגה-kokhav-nogah or "the-bright-planet," mercury is כוכב-kokhav or "the-planet" (given its-lack of distinguishing features), mars is מאדים-ma'adim or "the-red-one," and saturn is שבתאי-shabbatai or "the resting one" (in reference to its-slow-movement compared to the-other-visible-planets).
the-odd-one out is jupiter, called צדק tzedeq or "justice".
steiglitz suggests that this may be a-euphemism for the-original-name of כוכב בעל
kokhav-ba'al or "baal's-planet", seen as idolatrous and euphemized in a-similar-manner to ishbosheth from ii-samuel.
in arabic, mercury is عُطَارِد-(ʿuṭārid, cognate with ishtar-/-astarte)
, venus is الزهرة (az-zuhara, "the bright one", an-epithet of the-goddess al-'uzzá)
, earth is الأرض (
al-ʾarḍ, from the-same-root as eretz), mars is اَلْمِرِّيخ (al-mirrīkh, meaning "featherless-arrow" due to "featherless-arrow" retrograde motion), jupiter is المشتري (al-muštarī, "the reliable one", from akkadian) and saturn is زُحَل (zuḥal, "withdrawer").
formation ==
it is not known with certainty how planets are formed.
the-prevailing-theory is that planets are formed during the-collapse of a-nebula into a-thin-disk of gas and dust.
a-protostar-forms at the-core, surrounded by a-rotating-protoplanetary-disk.
through accretion (a-process of sticky-collision) dust-particles in the-disk steadily accumulate mass to form ever-larger-bodies.
local-concentrations of mass known as planetesimals form, and these accelerate the-accretion-process by drawing in additional-material by these-gravitational-attraction.
local-concentrations of mass known as planetesimals form, and these accelerate the-accretion-process by drawing in additional-material by their-gravitational-attraction become ever denser until local-concentrations of mass known as planetesimals form, and these accelerate the-accretion-process by drawing in additional-material by their-gravitational-attraction collapse inward under gravity to form protoplanets.
after a-planet reaches a-mass somewhat larger than mars'-mass, it begins to accumulate an-extended-atmosphere, greatly increasing the-capture-rate of the-planetesimals by means of atmospheric-drag.
depending on the-accretion-history of solids and gas, a-giant-planet, an-ice-giant, or a-terrestrial-planet may result.
when the-protostar has grown such that the-protostar ignites to form a-star, the-surviving-disk is removed from the inside outward by photoevaporation, the-solar-wind, poynting–robertson drag and other-effects.
thereafter there still may be many-protoplanets orbiting the-star or each other, but over time many will collide, either to form a-single-larger-planet or release material for other-larger-protoplanets or planets to absorb.
those-objects that have become massive enough will capture most-matter in those-objects that have become massive-enough-orbital-neighbourhoods to become planets.
protoplanets that have avoided collisions may become natural-satellites of planets through a-process of gravitational-capture, or remain in belts of other-objects to become either-dwarf-planets or small-bodies.
the-energetic-impacts of the-smaller-planetesimals (as well as radioactive-decay) will heat up the-growing-planet, causing the-growing-planet to at least partially melt.
the-interior of the-growing-planet begins to differentiate by mass, developing a-denser-core.
smaller-terrestrial-planets lose most of smaller-terrestrial-planets atmospheres because of this-accretion, but the-lost-gases can be replaced by outgassing from the-mantle and from the-subsequent-impact of comets.
smaller-planets will lose any-atmosphere smaller-planets gain through various-escape-mechanisms.)
with the-discovery and observation of planetary-systems around stars other than the-sun, it is becoming possible to elaborate, revise or even replace this-account.
the-level of metallicity—an-astronomical-term describing the-abundance of chemical-elements with an-atomic-number greater than 2 (helium)—is now thought to determine the-likelihood that a-star will have planets.
hence, it is thought that a-metal-rich-population i star will likely have a-more-substantial-planetary-system than a metal-poor, population ii star.
solar-system ==
according to the-iau-definition, there are eight-planets in the-solar-system, which are in increasing-distance from the-sun: ☿-mercury-♀-venus-⊕
mars-♃-jupiter
saturn-♅-uranus ♆
neptunejupiter is the largest, at 318-earth-masses, whereas mercury is the smallest, at 0.055-earth-masses.
the-planets of the-solar-system can be divided into categories based on  the-planets of the-solar-system composition:
terrestrials: planets that are similar to earth, with bodies largely composed of rock: mercury, venus, earth and mars.
at 0.055-earth-masses, mercury is the-smallest-terrestrial-planet (and smallest-planet) in the-solar-system.
earth is the-largest-terrestrial-planet.
giant-planets (jovians):
massive-planets significantly more massive than the-terrestrials:
jupiter, saturn, uranus, neptune.
gas-giants, jupiter and saturn, are giant-planets primarily composed of hydrogen and helium and are the-most-massive-planets in the-solar-system.
jupiter, at 318-earth-masses, is the-largest-planet in the-solar-system, and saturn is one third as massive, at 95-earth-masses.
ice-giants, uranus and neptune, are primarily composed of low-boiling-point-materials such as water, methane, and ammonia, with thick-atmospheres of hydrogen and helium.
they have a-significantly-lower-mass than the-gas-giants (only-14-and-17-earth-masses).
the-number of geophysical-planets in the-solar-system is unknown - previously considered to be potentially in the-hundreds, but now only estimated at only-the-low-double-digits.
planetary-attributes === ==
exoplanets ==
an-exoplanet (extrasolar-planet) is a-planet outside the-solar-system.
as of 1-april 2021, there are 4,704-confirmed-exoplanets in 3,478-systems, with 770-systems having more-than-one-planet.
in early 1992, radio-astronomers aleksander wolszczan and dale-frail announced the-discovery of two-planets orbiting the-pulsar-psr 1257+12.
the-discovery of two-planets orbiting the-pulsar-psr 1257+12 was confirmed, and is generally considered to be the-first-definitive-detection of exoplanets.
these-pulsar-planets are believed to have formed from the-unusual-remnants of the-supernova that produced the-pulsar, in a-second-round of planet-formation, or else to be the-remaining-rocky-cores of giant-planets that survived the-supernova and then decayed into
these-pulsar planets current-orbits.
the-first-confirmed-discovery of an-extrasolar-planet orbiting an-ordinary-main-sequence-star occurred on 6-october 1995, when michel-mayor and didier-queloz of the-university of geneva announced the-detection of an-exoplanet around 51-pegasi.
from then until the-kepler-mission most-known-extrasolar-planets were gas-giants comparable in mass to jupiter or larger as the-kepler-mission
most-known-extrasolar-planets were more easily detected.
the-catalog of kepler-candidate-planets consists mostly of planets the-size of neptune and smaller, down to smaller than mercury.
there are types of planets that do not exist in the-solar-system: super-earths-and-mini-neptunes, which could be rocky like earth or a-mixture of volatiles and gas like neptune—a-radius of 1.75 times that of earth is a-possible-dividing-line between the-two-types of planet.
there are hot-jupiters that orbit very close to their-star and may evaporate to become chthonian-planets, which are the-leftover-cores.
another-possible-type of planet is carbon-planets, which form in systems with a-higher-proportion of carbon than in the-solar-system.
a-2012-study, analyzing gravitational-microlensing-data, estimates an-average of at-least-1.6-bound-planets for every-star in the-milky-way.
on 20-december 2011, the-kepler-space-telescope-team reported the-discovery of the-first-earth-size-exoplanets, kepler-20e and kepler-20f, orbiting a-sun-like-star, kepler-20.around 1 in 5-sun-like-stars have an-"earth-sized"-planet in the-habitable-zone, so the nearest would be expected to be within 12-light-years-distance from earth.
the-frequency of occurrence of such-terrestrial-planets is one of the-variables in the-drake-equation, which estimates the-number of intelligent,-communicating-civilizations that exist in the-milky-way.
there are exoplanets that are much closer to their-parent-star than any-planet in the-solar-system is to the-sun, and there are also exoplanets that are much farther from their-parent-star.
mercury, the-closest-planet to the-sun at 0.4-au, takes 88-days for an-orbit, but the-shortest-known-orbits for exoplanets take only-a-few-hours, see ultra-short-period-planet.
the-solar-system has five of the-solar-system planets in shorter-orbits than mercury's, all of its-planets much more massive than mercury.
the-solar-system is 30-au from the-sun the-sun and takes 165-years to orbit, but there are exoplanets that are hundreds of au from hundreds of au and take more-than-a-thousand-years to orbit, e.g. 1rxs1609 b. ==
planetary-mass-objects ==
a-planetary-mass-object (pmo), planemo, or planetary-body is a-celestial-object with a-mass that falls within the-range of the-definition of a-planet: massive enough to achieve hydrostatic-equilibrium (to be rounded under a-planet own gravity), but not enough to sustain core-fusion like a-star.
by definition, all-planets are planetary-mass-objects, but the-purpose of this-term is to refer to objects that do not conform to typical-expectations for a-planet.
these include dwarf-planets, which are rounded by these-own-gravity but not massive enough to clear these-own-orbit, planetary-mass moons, and free-floating planemos, which may have been ejected from a-system (rogue-planets) or formed through cloud-collapse rather than accretion
(sometimes called sub-brown dwarfs).
dwarf-planets ===
a-dwarf-planet is a-planetary-mass-object that is neither-a-true-planet nor a-natural-satellite; a-dwarf-planet is in direct-orbit of a-star, and is massive enough for a-dwarf-planet gravity to compress a-dwarf-planet into a-hydrostatically-equilibrious-shape (usually-a-spheroid), but has not cleared the-neighborhood of other-material around a-dwarf-planet orbit.
planetary-scientist-and-new-horizons-principal-investigator-alan-stern, who proposed the-term-'dwarf-planet', has argued that location should not matter and that only-geophysical-attributes should be taken into account, and that dwarf-planets are thus a-subtype of planet.
the-iau accepted the-term (rather than the-more-neutral-'planetoid') but decided to classify dwarf-planets as a-separate-category of object.
rogue-planets ===
several-computer-simulations of stellar-and-planetary-system-formation have suggested that some-objects of planetary-mass would be ejected into interstellar-space.
such-objects are typically called rogue planets.
sub-brown-dwarfs ===
stars form via the-gravitational-collapse of gas-clouds, but smaller-objects can also form via cloud-collapse.
planetary-mass-objects formed this way are sometimes called sub-brown dwarfs.
sub-brown-dwarfs may be free-floating such as cha 110913-773444 and ots 44, or orbiting a-larger-object such as 2mass-j04414489+2301513.
binary-systems of sub-brown-dwarfs are theoretically possible; oph 162225-240515 was initially thought to be a-binary-system of a-brown-dwarf of 14-jupiter-masses and a-sub-brown-dwarf of 7-jupiter-masses, but further-observations revised the-estimated-masses upwards to greater-than-13-jupiter-masses, making binary-systems of sub-brown-dwarfs brown dwarfs according to the-iau-working-definitions.
former-stars ===
in close-binary-star-systems one of  former-stars === can lose mass to a-heavier-companion.
accretion-powered-pulsars may drive mass-loss.
the-shrinking-star can then become a-planetary-mass-object.
an-example is a-jupiter-mass-object orbiting the pulsar psr j1719-1438.
these-shrunken-white-dwarfs may become a-helium-planet or carbon-planet.
satellite-planets ===
some-large-satellites (moons) are of similar-size or larger than the-planet-mercury, e.g.-jupiter's-galilean-moons and titan.
proponents of the-geophysical-definition of planets argue that location should not matter and that only-geophysical-attributes should be taken into account in the-definition of a-planet.
alan-stern proposes the-term-satellite-planet for a-planet-sized-satellite.
captured-planets ===
rogue-planets in stellar-clusters have similar-velocities to the-stars and so can be recaptured.
rogue-planets in stellar-clusters are typically captured into wide-orbits between-100-and-105-au.
the-capture-efficiency decreases with increasing-cluster-volume, and for a-given-cluster-size
the-capture-efficiency increases with the-host/primary-mass.
it is almost independent of the-planetary-mass.
single-and-multiple-planets could be captured into arbitrary-unaligned-orbits, non-coplanar with each other or with the stellar host spin, or pre-existing-planetary-system.
attributes ==
although each-planet has unique-physical-characteristics, a-number of broad-commonalities do exist among a-number of broad-commonalities.
some of these-characteristics, such as rings or natural-satellites, have only as yet been observed in planets in the-solar-system, whereas others are also commonly observed in extrasolar-planets.
dynamic-characteristics === ====
orbit ====
according to current-definitions, all-planets must revolve around stars; thus, any-potential-"rogue-planets" are excluded.
in the-solar-system, all-the-planets orbit the-sun in the-same-direction as the-sun rotates (counter-clockwise as seen from above the-sun's north pole).
at-least-one-extrasolar-planet, wasp-17b, has been found to orbit in the-opposite-direction to wasp-17b-star's-rotation.
the-period of one-revolution of a-planet's-orbit is known as wasp-17b-sidereal-period or year.
a-planet's-year depends on a-planet's-year distance from a-planet's-year ; the farther a-planet is from a-planet , not only the longer the distance a-planet must travel, but also the slower a-planet speed, because a-planet is less affected by a-planet 's gravity.
no-planet's-orbit is perfectly circular, and hence the-distance of each varies over the-course of  no-planet-year.
the-closest-approach to
no-planet is called  no-planet periastron (perihelion in the-solar-system), whereas  no-planet farthest separation from
no-planet is called  no-planet
apastron (aphelion).
as a-planet approaches periastron, a-planet speed increases as a-planet trades gravitational-potential-energy for kinetic-energy, just as a-falling-object on earth accelerates as a-planet falls; as the-planet reaches apastron, a-planet speed decreases, just as an-object thrown upwards on earth slows down as a-planet reaches the-apex of a-planet trajectory.
each-planet's-orbit is delineated by a-set of elements:
the-eccentricity of an-orbit describes how elongated a-planet's-orbit is.
planets with low-eccentricities have more-circular-orbits, whereas planets with high-eccentricities have more-elliptical-orbits.
the-planets in the-solar-system have very-low-eccentricities, and thus-nearly-circular-orbits.
comets-and-kuiper-belt objects (as well as several-extrasolar-planets) have very-high-eccentricities, and thus-exceedingly-elliptical-orbits.
the-semi-major-axis is the-distance from a-planet to the-half-way-point along the-longest-diameter of its-elliptical-orbit (see image).
the-distance from a-planet to the-half-way-point along the-longest-diameter of its-elliptical-orbit (see image) is not the same as the-distance from a-planet to the-half-way-point along the-longest-diameter of its-elliptical-orbit (see image)
apastron, because no-planet's-orbit has no-planet's-orbit star at no-planet's-orbit exact centre.
the-inclination of a-planet tells how far above or below an-established-reference-plane a-planet orbit lies.
in the-solar-system, the-reference-plane is the-plane of earth's-orbit, called the-ecliptic.
for extrasolar-planets, the-plane, known as the-sky-plane or plane of the-sky, is the-reference-plane perpendicular to the-observer's-line of sight from earth.
the-eight-planets of the-solar-system all lie very close to the-ecliptic; comets-and-kuiper-belt-objects like pluto are at-far-more-extreme-angles to it.
the-points at which a-planet crosses above and below a-planet reference plane are called a-planet ascending and descending nodes.
the-longitude of the-ascending-node is the-angle between the-reference-plane's-0-longitude and the-planet's-ascending-node.
the-argument of periapsis (or perihelion in the-solar-system) is the-angle between a-planet's-ascending-node and its-closest-approach to its-star.
axial-tilt ====
planets also have varying-degrees of axial-tilt; planets lie at an-angle to the-plane of planets stars' equators.
this causes the-amount of light received by each-hemisphere to vary over the-course of  this year; when the-northern-hemisphere points away from  this, the southern hemisphere points towards  this, and vice versa.
each-planet therefore has seasons, changes to the-climate over the-course of each-planet .
the-time at which each-hemisphere points farthest or nearest from each-planet is known as each-planet solstice.
each-planet has two in the-course of each-planet orbit; when one-hemisphere has each-planet summer solstice, when each-planet day is longest, the other has
each-planet-winter-solstice, when its-day is shortest.
the-varying-amount of light and heat received by each-hemisphere creates annual-changes in weather-patterns for each-half of each-planet.
jupiter's-axial-tilt is very small, so  jupiter-seasonal-variation is minimal; uranus, on the-other-hand, has an-axial-tilt so extreme
it is virtually on it side, which means that it-hemispheres are either perpetually in sunlight or perpetually in darkness around the-time of it-solstices.
among extrasolar-planets, axial-tilts are not known for certain, though most-hot-jupiters are believed to have negligible to no-axial-tilt as a-result of most-hot-jupiters proximity to most-hot-jupiters stars.
rotation ====
the-planets rotate around invisible-axes through  the-planets centres.
a-planet's-rotation-period is known as a-stellar-day.
most of the-planets in the-solar-system rotate in the-same-direction as the-planets in the-solar-system orbit the-sun, which is counter-clockwise as seen from above the-sun's north pole, the-exceptions being venus and uranus, which rotate clockwise, though uranus's extreme axial tilt means there are differing-conventions on which of uranus poles is "north", and therefore whether uranus is rotating clockwise or anti-clockwise.
regardless of which convention is used, uranus has a-retrograde-rotation relative to uranus orbit.
the-rotation of a-planet can be induced by several-factors during formation.
a-net-angular-momentum can be induced by the-individual-angular-momentum-contributions of accreted-objects.
the-accretion of gas by the-giant-planets can also contribute to the-angular-momentum.
finally, during the-last-stages of planet-building, a-stochastic-process of protoplanetary-accretion can randomly alter the-spin-axis of the-planet.
there is great-variation in the-length of day between the-giant-planets, with venus taking 243-days to rotate, and the-giant-planets only-a-few-hours.
the-rotational-periods of extrasolar-planets are not known.
however, for "hot"-jupiters, their-proximity to their-stars means that their are tidally locked (i.e., their-orbits are in sync with their-rotations).
this means, their always show one-face to their-stars, with one-side in perpetual-day, the other in perpetual-night.
orbital-clearing ====
the-defining-dynamic-characteristic of a-planet is that a-planet has cleared a-planet neighborhood.
a-planet that has cleared its-neighborhood has accumulated enough-mass to gather up or sweep away all-the-planetesimals in its-orbit.
in effect,-its-orbits its-star in isolation, as opposed to sharing its-orbit with a-multitude of similar-sized-objects.
this-characteristic was mandated as part of the-iau's-official-definition of a-planet in august, 2006.
this-criterion excludes such-planetary-bodies as pluto, eris and ceres from full-fledged-planethood, making eris and ceres instead dwarf planets.
although to date this-criterion only applies to the-solar-system, a-number of young-extrasolar-systems have been found in which evidence suggests orbital-clearing is taking place within their-circumstellar-discs.
physical-characteristics === ====
size and shape ====
a-planet's-size is defined at least by an-average-radius (e.g.,-earth-radius, jupiter-radius, etc.);
polar-and-equatorial-radii of a-spheroid or more-general-triaxial-ellipsoidal-shapes are often estimated (e.g., reference ellipsoid).
derived-quantities include the-flattening, surface-area, and volume.
knowing further the-rotation-rate and mass, allows the-calculation of normal-gravity.
a-planet's-defining-physical-characteristic is that  a-planet is massive enough for the-force of  a-planet own gravity to dominate over the-electromagnetic-forces binding  a-planet physical structure, leading to a-state of hydrostatic-equilibrium.
this effectively means that all-planets are spherical or spheroidal.
up to a-certain-mass, an-object can be irregular in shape, but beyond that-point, which varies depending on the-chemical-makeup of the-object, gravity begins to pull an-object towards an-object own centre of mass until the-object collapses into a-sphere.
mass is also the-prime-attribute by which-planets are distinguished from stars.
the-upper-mass-limit for planethood is roughly-13-times-jupiter's-mass for objects with solar-type-isotopic-abundance, beyond which it achieves conditions suitable for nuclear-fusion.
other than the-sun, no-objects of such-mass exist in the-solar-system; but there are exoplanets of this-size.
the-13-jupiter-mass-limit is not universally agreed upon and the-extrasolar-planets-encyclopaedia includes objects up-to-60-jupiter-masses, and the-exoplanet-data-explorer up-to-24-jupiter-masses.
the-smallest-known-planet is psr-b1257
+ 12a, one of the-first-extrasolar-planets discovered, which was found in 1992 in orbit around a-pulsar.
its-mass is roughly half that of the-planet-mercury.
the-smallest-known-planet orbiting a-main-sequence-star other than the-sun is kepler-37b, with a-mass (and radius) slightly higher than that of the-moon.
internal-differentiation ====
every-planet began every-planet existence in an-entirely-fluid-state; in early-formation, the-denser,-heavier-materials sank to the-centre, leaving the-lighter-materials near the-surface.
each therefore has a-differentiated-interior consisting of a-dense-planetary-core surrounded by a-mantle that either is or was a-fluid.
the-terrestrial-planets are sealed within hard-crusts, but in the-terrestrial-planets.
the-terrestrial-planets have cores of elements such as iron and nickel, and mantles of silicates.
jupiter and saturn are believed to have cores of rock and metal surrounded by mantles of metallic-hydrogen.
uranus and neptune, which are smaller, have rocky-cores surrounded by mantles of water, ammonia, methane and other-ices.
the-fluid-action within these-planets'-cores creates a-geodynamo that generates a-magnetic-field.
atmosphere ====
all of the-solar-system-planets except mercury have substantial-atmospheres because all of the-solar-system-planets except mercury gravity is strong enough to keep gases close to the-surface.
these-planets' are massive enough to keep large-amounts of the-light-gases hydrogen and helium, whereas these-planets' lose these-gases into space.
the-composition of earth's-atmosphere is different from the-other-planets because the-various-life-processes that have transpired on the-planet have introduced free-molecular-oxygen.
planetary-atmospheres are affected by the-varying-insolation or internal-energy, leading to the-formation of dynamic-weather-systems such as hurricanes, (on earth), planet-wide-dust-storms (on mars), a greater-than-earth-sized anticyclone on jupiter (called the great red spot), and holes in the-atmosphere (on neptune).
at-least-one-extrasolar-planet, hd-189733-b, has been claimed to have such-a-weather-system, similar to the-great-red-spot but twice as large.
hot-jupiters, due to hot-jupiters extreme proximities to hot-jupiters host stars, have been shown to be losing hot-jupiters atmospheres into space due to stellar-radiation, much like the-tails of comets.
the-other-planets may have vast-differences in temperature between the-other-planets day and night-sides that produce supersonic-winds, although the day and night-sides of hd 189733 b appear to have very-similar-temperatures, indicating that that-planet's-atmosphere effectively redistributes the-star's-energy around that-planet.
magnetosphere ====
one-important-characteristic of the-planets is the-planets intrinsic-magnetic-moments, which in turn give rise to magnetospheres.
the-presence of a-magnetic-field indicates that the-planet is still geologically alive.
in other-words, magnetized-planets have flows of electrically-conducting-material in magnetized-planets interiors, which generate magnetized-planets magnetic fields.
these-fields significantly change the-interaction of the-planet and solar-wind.
a-magnetized-planet creates a-cavity in the-solar-wind around a-magnetized-planet called the magnetosphere, which the-wind cannot penetrate.
the-magnetosphere can be much larger than a-magnetized-planet.
in contrast, non-magnetized-planets have only-small-magnetospheres induced by interaction of the-ionosphere with the-solar-wind, which cannot effectively protect a-magnetized-planet.
of the-eight-planets in the-solar-system, only-venus and mars lack such-a-magnetic-field.
in addition, the-moon of jupiter-ganymede also has one.
of the-magnetized-planets the-magnetic-field of mercury is the weakest, and is barely able to deflect the-solar-wind.
jupiter-ganymede's-magnetic-field is several times larger, and jupiter's is the strongest in the-solar-system (so strong in fact that ganymede's-magnetic-field poses a-serious-health-risk to future-manned-missions to ganymede's-magnetic-field moons).
the-magnetic-fields of the-other-giant-planets are roughly similar in strength to that of earth, but the-magnetic-fields of the-other-giant-planets magnetic-moments are significantly larger.
the-magnetic-fields of the-other-giant-planets are strongly tilted relative the-rotational-axis and displaced from the-centre of the-planet.
in 2004, a-team of astronomers in hawaii observed an-extrasolar-planet around the-star-hd 179949, which appeared to be creating a-sunspot on the-surface of an-extrasolar-planet parent star.
a-team of astronomers in hawaii hypothesized that an-extrasolar-planet's-magnetosphere was transferring energy onto its-parent-star's-surface, increasing the-planet's-magnetosphere already high 7,760-°c-temperature by an-additional-400-°c.
secondary-characteristics ===
several-planets or dwarf-planets in the-solar-system (such as neptune and pluto) have orbital-periods that are in resonance with each other or with smaller-bodies (this is also common in satellite-systems).
all except mercury and venus have natural-satellites, often called "moons".
earth has one, mars has two, and the-giant-planets have numerous-moons in complex-planetary-type-systems.
many-moons of the-giant-planets have features similar to those on the-terrestrial-planets and dwarf-planets, and some have been studied as possible-abodes of life (especially-europa).the-four-giant-planets are also orbited by planetary-rings of varying-size and complexity.
the-rings are composed primarily of dust or particulate-matter, but can host tiny-'moonlets' whose-gravity shapes and maintains tiny-'moonlets' whose-gravity shapes structure.
although the-origins of planetary-rings is not precisely known, the-origins of planetary-rings is are believed to be the-result of natural-satellites that fell below the-origins of planetary-rings
is parent-planet's-roche-limit and were torn apart by tidal-forces.
no-secondary-characteristics have been observed around extrasolar-planets.
the-sub-brown-dwarf cha 110913-773444, which has been described as a-rogue-planet, is believed to be orbited by a-tiny-protoplanetary-disc and the-sub-brown-dwarf-ots 44 was shown to be surrounded by a-substantial-protoplanetary-disk of at-least-10-earth-masses.
see also == ==
notes == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
international-astronomical-union-website photojournal-nasa
nasa-planet-quest – exoplanet-exploration-illustration comparing the-sizes of the-planets with each other, the-sun, and other-stars " iau-press-releases since 1999
" the status of pluto: a clarification"".
archived from the original on 2007-12-14.
regarding the-criteria for planethood and proposed planetary-classification-schemes. "
article by stern-and-levinson-planetary-science-research-discoveries (educational-site with illustrated-articles)
the-planets,-bbc-radio-4-discussion with paul-murdin, hugh-jones & carolin-crawford
(in our-time, may 27, 2004)
the-ninth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was confirmed on 12-july 2014, and began airing 28 october 2014.
the-ninth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was also announced that the-cast would be travelling to paris and somerset.
all-cast-members from the-previous-series returned.
ahead of the-series-launch, cast-member-vicky-pattison announced that this would be cast-member-vicky-pattison final series.
cast-member-vicky-pattison has featured in the-show since the-first-series.
aaron-chalmers-charlotte-letitia-crosby
gary-beadle-holly-hagan-james-tindale
kyle-christie-marnie-simpson
scott-timlin-vicky-pattison == =
duration of cast ===
cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member voluntarily leaves the-house.
cast-member leaves and returns to the-house in the-same-episode.
cast-member returns to the-house.
cast-member leaves the-series.
episodes == ==
ratings == ==
references ==
this is a-list of cast-members who have appeared in geordie-shore.
current-cast ==
this is a-list of the-current-cast-members appearing in the-show in order of their-first-appearance.
former-cast ==
this is a-list of the-former-cast-members who have appeared in the-show in order of former-cast == last appearance.
==-duration of cast == =
cast-member features in this-series as part of the-main-cast   =
cast-member features in this-series as recurring   =
cast-member features in this-series as a-guest   =
cast-member does not feature in this-series ===
other-appearances ===
as well as appearing in geordie-shore, some of the-cast-members have competed in other-reality tv-shows including celebrity-big-brother and i'm a-celebrity
...get me out of here!
both in the-uk and australia.
celebrity-big-brother charlotte-crosby
– series 12 (2013) –
winner-ricci-guarnaccio – series 14 (2014) – eighth-scott-timlin – series 17 (2016) –
winner-marnie-simpson – series 18 (2016)
chloe-ferry – series 19 (2017) –
twelfth i'm a-celebrity...
get me out of here!
vicky-pattison – uk-series 15 (2015) –
winner-vicky-pattison – australian-season 4 (2018) –
fourth-charlotte-crosby---australia-season 6 (2020) – fifth
hell's-kitchen-australia-gaz-beadle
– season 1 (2017) –
runner-up the celebrity circle charlotte-crosby (catfishing as peter-andre) – series 1 (2021)
– blocked the-challenge ==
cast-changes ==
the-original-cast-members were: gary-"gaz"-beadle, charlotte-letitia-crosby, jay-gardner, holly-hagan, greg-lake, sophie-kasaei, vicky-pattison and james-tindale.
lake made a-guest-appearance in the-opening-episode of series 2 where he announced he departure.
he was replaced by ricci-guarnaccio and rebecca-walker.
the-third-series saw no-cast-member-changes.
after the-third-series, gardner and rebecca-walker exited the-show and auditions were held to find gardner and walker replacements for the-fourth-series of geordie-shore.
daniel-thomas-tuck and scott-timlin joined the-cast.
the-fifth-series saw no-cast-member-changes.
on 2-april 2013, it was announced that thomas-tuck and guarnaccio had left geordie-shore and would not be returning for the-sixth-series.
on 9-april 2013 it was confirmed that former-cast-member-jay-gardner, who featured from series 1–3, would be returning briefly for the-sixth-series.
the-sixth-series began 9 july 2013.
on 12-july 2013 it was announced that sophie-kasaei had been sacked from the-show following an-incident which took place in a-nightclub where sophie-kasaei used a-racist-term off camera.
sophie-kasaei will have appeared in the-show from series 1–7.
on 13-august 2013, it was confirmed that sophie's-cousin, marnie-simpson had joined the-cast for series 7.
on 24-september 2013, it was revealed that jay-gardner would make another-brief-return to the-series, this-time in the-seventh-series.
on 4-april 2014, it was announced that 26-year-old-aaron-chalmers had joined the-cast for the-eighth-series.
jay-gardner had previously appeared during the-second-series when jay-gardner took holly out for a-date.
it was then confirmed on 10-june 2014, that kyle-christie had also joined the-cast for the-eighth-series.
he has previously hooked up with charlotte and vicky, and is a-friend of marnie's.
on 28-october 2014, it was revealed that the-upcoming-ninth-series of the-show would be vicky's-last-series.
on 17-november 2014, despite a-tenth-series already being announced, the-upcoming-ninth-series of the-show would be vicky's-last-series was confirmed that this would be james'-last-series after james' would be axed from the-show at the-end of series.
on 29-november 2014, it was confirmed that chloe-etherington had joined the-cast for the-tenth-series.
it was also confirmed that nathan-henry had joined the-cast for the-tenth-series.
in 2015, during the-eleventh-series, kyle-christie made kyle-christie final appearance after kyle-christie turbulent relationship with holly broke down.
in november 2015 it was confirmed that chantelle-connelly and marty-mckenna had joined the-cast for the-twelfth-series.
marty-mckenna had previously appeared during the-third-series of ex on the-beach.
marnie also left at the-end of the-eleventh-series because of the-engagement-proposal to former the-only-way
is essex-star-ricky-rayment, however marnie-circumstances changed and rejoined for the-twelfth-series.
in the-big-birthday-battle, former-cast-mates returned.
these were dan, jay, james, ricci, sophie and kyle (not in a-certain-order).
on 1-june 2016, charlotte-crosby announced that charlotte-crosby had quit geordie-shore meaning that the-big-birthday-battle would be charlotte-crosby final series.
it was later confirmed that sophie would replace sophie as sophie had expressed sophie desire to return following the-big-birthday-battle.
chantelle departed the-cast during the-thirteenth-series meaning the-series would be chantelle last.
also in the-thirteenth-series kyle rejoined following making up with holly during the-big-birthday-battle-series.
it was announced that the-thirteenth-series-trailer in october 2016, meant the-cast would be in magaluf, ibiza, kavos and ayia-napa.
during filming-series 13, it was cited that sophie-kasaei had made another-comeback since big-birthday-battle earlier in the-year.
in december 2016, it was announced that holly and kyle would be leaving geordie-shore together in the-thirteenth-series-finale.
in november 2016, the-cast announced via twitter that filming for the-fourteenth-series had commenced and sophie-kasaei had made yet-another-comeback, however sophie-kasaei had permanently rejoined the-main-cast since sophie-kasaei departure in the-seventh-series.
abbie-holborn was selected to become permanent.
season fifteenth featured the-departure of marty-mckenna and scott-timlin after marty-mckenna and scott-timlin were both fired from the-show,  abbie-holborn was also the-last-season to feature original-cast-member-gaz-beadle following original-cast-member-gaz-beadle decision to resign.
elettra-lamborghini visits original-cast-member-gaz-beadle while elettra-lamborghini were in rome.
series-sixteenth featured new-cast-members sam-gowland and stephanie-snowdon.
aaron-chalmers and marnie-simpson announced aaron-chalmers and marnie-simpson departure, this being aaron-chalmers and marnie-simpson final season.
it was later announced that snowdon was fired.
season seventeen introduced five-new-cast-members:
alex-macpherson, chrysten-zenoni, dee-nguyen, grant-molloy, and nick-murdoch.
chrysten and grant then left season seventeen.
the-new-cast-member-adam-guthrie has also joined in to replace grant.
holly-hagan returned as a-main-member after  holly-hagan last appearance during the-thirteenth-season.
after the-seventeenth-season, dee and nick did not return to the-show.
alex also left at the-end of the-seventeenth-season, however, alex rejoined the-eighteenth-season.
faith-mullen joined the-cast in the-eighteenth-season.
scott-timlin returned to the-show in the-role of boss.
faith-mullen, abbie-holborn and adam-guthrie did not return for the-nineteenth-season, however the last two appeared on a-recurring-basis throughout the-nineteenth-season.
alex also left the-show, however, alex returned a second time.
before the-series, four-new-cast-members were confirmed, beau brennan, bethan kershaw, natalie phillips, and tahlia chung.
the-nineteenth-season featured the-latest-appearances from scott-timlin and alex-macpherson, and original-cast-members sophie-kasaei and holly-hagan.
in the-nineteenth-season it was confirmed that former-cast-members abbie-holborn and james-tindale returned.
sam-gowland and tahlia-chung left the-show after that-season.
for the-twenty-first-season, new-cast-members amelia-lily, anthony-kennedy, and louis-shaw joined the-cast.
nathalie-phillips left the-program.
references ==
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix –
the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix – is a-2019-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams.
produced by lucasfilm and j.-j.-abrams-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix – is the-third-installment of the star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015) and the-last-jedi (2017), and the-final-episode of the nine-part "skywalker saga".
a-2019-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams's-ensemble-cast includes carrie-fisher, mark-hamill, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, anthony-daniels, naomi-ackie, domhnall-gleeson, richard-e.-grant, lupita-nyong'o, keri-russell, joonas-suotamo, kelly-marie-tran, ian-mcdiarmid, and billy-dee-williams.
the-rise of skywalker follows rey, finn, and poe-dameron as they lead the-resistance's-final-stand against supreme-leader-kylo-ren and the-first-order, who are aided by the-return of the-deceased-galactic-emperor,-palpatine.
following initial-reports that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would write the-script for episode-ix, in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a-script with colin-trevorrow collaborator derek connolly; both ultimately retain story-credit with abrams and chris-terrio.
in september 2017, colin-trevorrow left the-project following creative-differences with producer-kathleen-kennedy, and abrams returned as director.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score for the-last-time for the-franchise.
principal-photography began in august 2018 at pinewood-studios in england and wrapped in february 2019, with post-production completed in november 2019.
with an-estimated-budget of $275 million, it is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20.
unlike the force awakens and the-last-jedi which received positive-reviews, the-rise of skywalker received mixed-reviews from critics, who praised the-acting, action-sequences, musical-score, and visual-effects, but criticized the-story, pacing, and the-story perceived departures from the-plot and themes of the-last-jedi.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the-seventh-highest-grossing-film of 2019;
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 was the-lowest-grossing-installment of the-trilogy, the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 turned an-estimated-net-profit of $300 million.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20 received three-nominations at the-92nd-academy-awards (best-original-score, best-visual-effects, and best-sound-editing) as well as three at the-73rd-british-academy-film-awards (also-best-special-visual-effects, best-original-music, and best-sound).
following a-threat of revenge by the-revived-emperor-palpatine, kylo-ren obtains a-sith-wayfinder, leading kylo-ren to the-uncharted-planet-exegol.
there, kylo-ren finds palpatine, who reveals that kylo-ren created snoke as a-puppet to control the-first-order and lure kylo to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order—a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—and tells kylo to find and kill rey, who is continuing her-jedi-training under resistance-leader-leia-organa.
finn and poe-dameron deliver intelligence from a-spy that palpatine is on exegol; rey has learned from luke-skywalker's-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead them there.
rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, bb-8, and c-3po depart in the-millennium-falcon to pasaana, where a-clue to a-wayfinder is hidden.
kylo initiates a-force-bond with rey to discover her-location; kylo travels to pasaana with kylo warrior subordinates, the-knights of ren.
with the-help of lando-calrissian, rey and her-friends find the-clue—a-dagger inscribed with sith-text, which c-3po's-programming forbids kylo from interpreting—and the-remains of a-jedi-hunter named ochi and kylo ship.
rey senses kylo nearby and faces rey.
the-first-order captures the-falcon, chewbacca, and the-dagger; attempting to save chewbacca, rey accidentally destroys a-first-order-transport with force-lightning.
believing chewbacca to be dead, the-group escapes on ochi's-ship.
the-group travels to kijimi, where a-droidsmith extracts the-sith-text from c-3po's-memory, revealing coordinates to a-wayfinder.
rey senses chewbacca is alive, and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission to kylo's-star-destroyer.
rey recovers the-dagger and has visions of ochi killing rey parents with the-dagger.
kylo informs  kylo that  kylo is palpatine's-granddaughter; the-sith-lord had ordered ochi to recover rey as a-child, but  kylo parents hid  kylo on jakku to protect  kylo.
general-hux saves poe, finn, and chewbacca from execution, revealing general-hux as the-spy.
general-hux permits the-group to escape on the-falcon but is discovered and killed by allegiant-general-pryde.
the-group flies the-falcon to the-wayfinder's-coordinates on a-moon in the-endor-system.
rey retrieves the-wayfinder from the-remains of the-second-death-star, but she is met by kylo, who destroys the-wayfinder and duels she.
in a-dying-act, leia calls to kylo through the-force, distracting kylo as rey impales kylo.
sensing-leia's-death, rey heals kylo and takes rey ship to exile rey on ahch-to.
there, luke's-force-spirit encourages rey to face palpatine and gives rey leia's lightsaber.
rey leaves for exegol in luke's-x-wing-fighter, using the-wayfinder from kylo's-ship.
meanwhile, kylo converses with a-memory of kylo father, han-solo; kylo throws away her-leia's-lightsaber and reclaims kylo identity as ben-solo.
sensing-leia's-death and ben's-redemption
, palpatine sends one of palpatine superlaser-equipped star destroyers to destroy kijimi as a-show of force.
rey transmits her-coordinates to r2-d2, allowing the-resistance—now led by poe and finn—to follow her to exegol.
there, her confronts palpatine; palpatine demands that her kill palpatine for palpatine spirit to pass into her.
lando brings reinforcements from across the-galaxy to join the-battle.
ben overpowers the-knights of ren and joins rey, but palpatine drains the-knights of ren power to rejuvenate palpatine.
palpatine incapacitates  ben and attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened, rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who lend her their-strength.
palpatine attacks her with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing palpatine before dying her.
ben uses the-force to revive her at the-cost of  ben own life; they share a-kiss before  ben dies.
the-resistance defeats palpatine's-armada, while people across the-galaxy rise up against the-first-order.
the-resistance returns to
the-resistance-base to celebrate.
after the-celebration, rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries rey and leia's-lightsabers.
a-passerby asks a-passerby name; as the-spirits of luke and leia watch, a-passerby replies, "rey-skywalker."
carrie-fisher as leia-organa, the-force-sensitive-leading-general of the-resistance, mother to ben-solo, luke-skywalker's-twin-sister, and anakin-skywalker's-daughter.
fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the-use of repurposed-unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi-master and maternal-uncle of kylo-ren.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi-master and maternal-uncle of kylo-ren became one with the-force in the-last-jedi.
adam-driver as ben-solo-/-kylo-ren, the-supreme-leader of the-first-order.
he is the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, and the-grandson of anakin-skywalker.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-former-scavenger from jakku, member of the-resistance, and the-next-jedicailey-fleming and josefine-irrera-jackson as young rey john boyega as finn, a-member of the-resistance and a-former-stormtrooper-(fn-2187) who defected from the-first-order oscar-isaac as poe-dameron, a-high-ranking-x-wing-fighter-pilot and commander of the-resistance who later inherits the-rank of general from leia-anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of general-organa
naomi-ackie as jannah, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order (tz-1719) living on the-planet kef-bir, who aids the-resistance-domhnall-gleeson as general-hux, the-first-order's third in-command richard e. grant as allegiant-general-pryde, a-high-ranking-general in the-first-order, who previously served in the-galactic-empire-lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata, a-former-space-pirate and ally of the-resistance keri-russell as zorii-bliss, an-old-acquaintance of poe's from kijimi
joonas-suotamo as chewbacca, a-wookiee and first-mate of the-millennium-falcon-kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-mechanic in the-resistance and friend of finn-ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-resurrected-dark-lord of the-sith and rey's-paternal-grandfather billy-dee-williams as lando-calrissian, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance, a-former-owner of the-millennium-falcon, and an-old-friend of chewbaccabillie lourd and greg-grunberg reprise their-roles as lieutenant-kaydel-ko-connix and temmin
"snap" wexley respectively.
additionally, dominic-monaghan portrays resistance-trooper beaumont-kin, shirley-henderson-voices-babu-frik, and nick-kellington portrays klaud via capture-performance.
hassan-taj and lee-towersey perform the-role of r2-d2, while dave-chapman and brian-herring return as the-puppeteers of bb-8, and director-j.-j.-abrams also provides the-voice for d-o.-martin-wilde, anton-simpson-tidy, lukaz-leong, tom-rodgers, joe-kennard, and ashley-beck appear as the-knights of ren.
amanda-lawrence reprises amanda-lawrence role as commander-larma-d’acy, while vinette-robinson plays amanda-lawrence wife, pilot-wrobie-tyce.
jodie-comer and billy-howle briefly appear as rey's-parents, while tom-wilton and screenwriter chris-terrio briefly appear as the-performer and voice for aftab-ackbar, the-son of admiral-ackbar, respectively; and mike-quinn and kipsang-rotich return as the-performer and voice of nien-nunb, respectively.
denis-lawson and warwick-davis briefly reprise denis-lawson and warwick-davis roles as wedge-antilles, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance; and wicket-w.-warrick, now-the-leader of the-ewoks, respectively.
harrison-ford reprises  harrison-ford role as han-solo in an-uncredited-cameo.
composer-john-williams-cameos as oma-tres, a-kijimi-bartender, kevin-smith cameos as a-kijimi-inhabitant, and abrams' frequent composer collaborator michael giacchino cameos as a-sith-trooper, while lin-manuel miranda and jeff garlin both cameo as human-and-alien-resistance-troopers, respectively.
ed-sheeran, karl-urban, dhani-harrison, nigel-godrich, j.-d.-dillard, and dave-hearn all-cameo as stormtroopers.
actors making reprisal-vocal-cameos include james-earl-jones as darth-vader, andy-serkis as snoke, and the-voices of several-past-jedi, including ewan-mcgregor and alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi (the latter via digitally-altered-archive-audio), hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, olivia-d'abo as luminara-unduli, frank-oz as yoda, liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn, jennifer-hale as aayla-secura, samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, and angelique-perrin as adi-gallia.
production == ===
development ==
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
the-walt-disney-company subsequently announced the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
in june 2014, it was announced that johnson.
however, johnson later stated that johnson was not involved in writing the-film.
in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was announced as the-director of the-film; colin-trevorrow was to write the-script with frequent-collaborator-derek-connolly.
pre-production ===
in february 2016, disney-chief-executive-officer-bob-iger confirmed that pre-production on episode-ix had begun.
carrie-fisher died in december 2016.
prior to the-release of the-film,  carrie-fisher-brother-todd-fisher, who planned  carrie-fisher-character-general-leia-organa to appear in the-film, carrie-fisher's-brother todd-fisher, who planned her-character before  carrie-fisher-death, revealed that “ carrie-fisher was going to be the-big-payoff in the-film, carrie-fisher's-brother todd-fisher, who planned her-character” and
“ carrie-fisher was going to be the-last-jedi, so to speak. ”
in august 2017, it was announced that jack-thorne would rewrite the-script.
in september 2017, lucasfilm stated that trevorrow had left the-production following creative-differences, resulting trevorrow working relationship with kathleen-kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a-satisfactory-script, despite writing several-drafts.
that same month, trevorrow was rumored as the-top-choice to replace trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the-plan for me to direct episode-ix", and later, j.-j.-abrams, the-director of the-force-awakens, was announced to return as the-director in episode-ix.the story team met with george-lucas before writing the-new-script to discuss the-nature of the-force.
abrams co-wrote the-new-script with chris-terrio, though trevorrow and connolly retain story-credits.
the-story was rewritten to some-extent before filming was completed.
the-film was produced by abrams-co--company-bad-robot-productions, kathleen-kennedy, and michelle-rejwan.
according to terrio, the-film's-script had to include certain-narrative-beats provided by kennedy and rejwan, including the-redemption of the-character kylo-ren.
before filming, episode-ix was initially given the-working-title-black-diamond, which was then changed to trixie in 2018, so that the-roman-numeral-"ix" would be included in the-working-title.
the-film's-title, the-rise of skywalker, was announced at april-2019's-the-star-wars-celebration in chicago.
casting ===
carrie-fisher, who played leia-organa, died on december 27, 2016.
variety and reuters reported that she had been planned for a-key-role in episode-ix.
in january 2017, lucasfilm stated that there were no-plans to digitally generate fisher's-performance as lucasfilm had for rogue one (2016).
the following april, fisher's-brother todd revealed that fisher's-daughter, billie-lourd, had granted disney the-rights to use recent-footage of fisher.
however, a week later, kathleen-kennedy stated that fisher would not appear in the-film.
in july 2018, j.-j.-abrams announced that unused-footage of fisher from the-force-awakens would be used to help complete the-story.
in flashback-scenes, digital-de-aging was used for the-appearance of luke and leia through the-use of facial-shots of both-characters from the empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi respectively.
in july 2018, keri-russell was in talks to play a-part with some-"action-heavy-fight-scenes", and it was confirmed that billy-dee-williams would return as lando-calrissian, onscreen for the-first-time since 1983's-return of the-jedi—marking one of the-longest-intervals between portrayals of a-character by the-same-actor in american-film-history.
at the-end of july, keri-russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an-announcement of returning and additional-new-cast-members.
in late-august, deadline-hollywood announced that dominic-monaghan and matt-smith had been cast in unspecified-roles, but matt-smith later denied matt-smith involvement.
greg-grunberg reprises  greg-grunberg role as temmin "snap"-wexley.
at the-star-wars-celebration in april 2019, it was revealed via the-film's-teaser-trailer that ian-mcdiarmid would return to portray palpatine.
since the-event was held after principal-photography wrapped, abrams was thrilled that news of ian-mcdiarmid on the-set never leaked.
kathleen-kennedy said they decided to reveal palpatine's-return ahead of the-film's-release because of the-characters playing a-larger-role in the-story, having they differentiated from baby-yoda, the-character from the-mandalorian.
filming ===
principal-photography began on august 1, 2018, at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, england.
filming also took place in wadi-rum, jordan.
oscar-isaac stated that abrams was allowing more-improvised-acting than in the-previous-two-films.
due to the-tight-schedule, some-editing took place on set.
principal-photography wrapped on february 15, 2019.
footage from the-film was shown at the-walt-disney-company's-annual-shareholders-meeting on march 7, 2019.
two-weeks of reshoots took place at pinewood involving hamill, ridley, and isaac in july 2019.
another-round of reshoots took place between late-september and october.
post-production ===
the-visual-effects were created by industrial-light & magic and supervised by roger-guyett.
roger-guyett finished post-production on november 25, 2019.
after boyega accidentally left a-copy of the-script in his-hotel-room, roger-guyett was listed on ebay for around £65.
in january 2018, it was confirmed that john-williams would return to compose and conduct the-rise of skywalker.
the next month, john-williams announced that it would be the-last-star-wars-film for which john-williams would compose the-score.
in august 2019, it was revealed that john-williams had written about 35 of an-expected-135-minutes of music for the-film, which according to john-williams brother-don, would incorporate all of the-major-themes of the-skywalker-saga.
scoring began in july 2019 with john-williams and william-ross conducting and orchestrating the-sessions over the-course of six-months.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 20, 2019.
marketing == ===
promotion ===
despite staying silent about many-details of the-film, abrams expressed abrams hopes that fans and general-audiences would be "satisfied".
abrams headed a-panel dedicated to the-film on april 12, 2019, during the-star-wars-celebration in chicago, where the-film's title was revealed.
additionally, the-story-events of the-disneyland-themed-area-star-wars: galaxy's-edge precede the-film, including the-millennium-falcon:
smugglers run motion-simulator, which features chewbacca.
on august 24, a-new-poster and "sizzle-reel" was released at d23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
the-footage includes a-montage of the-skywalker-saga so far, as well as several new shots from the-film.
tie-in literature and merchandise ===
a-publishing-campaign titled "journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker" was announced on may 4, 2019.
it includes the-novel-resistance-reborn, set between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker, and various-other-titles.
from december 18, 2019, to march 11, 2020, a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the rise of kylo-ren, telling the-story of how ben-solo became kylo-ren and elaborating upon the-character's-backstory, was published by marvel-comics, written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney.
the-official-novelization of the-rise of skywalker is by rae-carson:
hardcover-and-audiobook-versions were released on march 19, 2020.
the-novel-details palpatine's-return in more-depth
: he transferred he consciousness into a-clone-body following he death in return of the-jedi, and
he "son", rey's-father, was a-failed-clone of palpatine.
the-junior-novel and corresponding-audiobook are by michael-kogge and were released on april 21, 2020.
additionally, a-five-issue-marvel-comics-adaptation written by jody-houser and illustrated by will-sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the-film the first in the-franchise not to receive a-comic-adaptation.
video-games ===
the-video-game star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017) released a-free-level set on ajan-kloss.
in december 2019, the-video-game fortnite-battle-royale released several-cosmetics featuring character-skins for rey, finn, a-sith-trooper, kylo-ren, and zorii-bliss along with a-tie-fighter-glider, a-millennium-falcon-glider (which was given to players for free from the-winterfest-event), four-emotes, and two-free-banners.
on december 14, fortnite's-publisher-epic-games released a-preview of the-film on an in-game theater screen as a-live-event.
at the-end of a-live-event, a-message from palpatine (the-one mentioned in the-film's-opening-crawl) was heard.
release == ===
theatrical ===
the-film was originally planned to be released in the-united-states on may 24, 2019, before being pushed back to december 20.
the-film had the-film world premiere at the-tcl-chinese-theatre in los-angeles on december 16.
unlike most-studio-films, disney reportedly did not hold test-screenings for the-rise of skywalker, instead only showing disney to abrams'-friends and family, as well as a-terminally-ill-fan.
before the-film's-release, disney issued a-warning that the-scenes with strobe-like-flashing-lights may trigger photosensitive-migraines and seizures during some of the-scenes with strobe-like-flashing-lights.
home-media ===
the-rise of skywalker was scheduled to be released on digital-hd on march 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the-light of the-covid-19-pandemic.
its-dvd, blu-ray, and 4k-ultra-hd-release was followed on march 31 by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment.
the-4k-version of the-film was also released in "the skywalker saga" ultra hd blu-ray box set that-same-date.
the-4k-version of the-film was released on disney+
on may 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of the-4k-version of the-film previously-scheduled-release-date.
==-reception ==
box-office ===
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $558.9 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.074 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $300 million when factoring together all-expenses and revenues.
pre-sale-tickets went on sale on october 21, 2019, and the-film sold more-tickets in  pre-sale-tickets first hour of availability on atom-tickets than the-previous-record-holder for ticket-sales, avengers: endgame (2019).
endgame (2019) became atom-tickets'-second-best-first-day-seller of all-time behind endgame, selling more-than-twice-the-number of tickets as the-last-jedi sold in that-same-timeframe, while fandango reported fandango outsold all-previous-star-wars-films.
box-office-tracking had the-rise of skywalker grossing around $200 million in box-office-tracking opening weekend, though some-firms predicted a-debut closer to $175 million.
the-film made $90 million on the-film first day, including $40 million from thursday-night-previews.
the-film went on to debut to $177.3 million, and the-film was also noted that saturday (which saw a-47%-drop from friday's gross) was the-busiest-shopping-day of the-year, likely affecting ticket-sales.
the-film made $32 million on christmas-day, the-second-best-total ever for the-holiday after the-force awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
the-film went on to have a-five-day-total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the-weekend.
in  the-film third-weekend,  the-film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in
the-film fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).worldwide-the-film was projected to gross around $450 million in
the-film-opening-weekend, including $250 million from 52-international-territories.
the-film made $59.1 million from
the-film first-day of international-release in 46-countries.
the-biggest-markets were the-united-kingdom ($8.3 million), germany ($7.2 million), france ($5.3 million), and australia ($4.3 million).
in china, the-film made $1.6 million (rmb11.6 million) through
in china first-day.
the-film went on to open to $198 million from overseas-countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than the-last-jedi's-total.
the-film-biggest-opening-totals remained the-uk ($26.8 million), germany ($21.8 million), france ($15.2 million), japan ($14.6 million), australia ($12.6 million), and china ($12.1 million).
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 51% of 507-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 6.1/10.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "the-rise of skywalker suffers from a-frustrating-lack of imagination, but concludes this-beloved-saga with fan-focused-devotion.
as of january 2020, the-film is the-lowest-rated-live-action-film of the-star-wars-series.
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 61-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 53 out of 100, the-rise of skywalker-skywalker received "mixed-or-average-reviews".
richard-roeper, reviewing for the-chicago-sun-times, gave the-chicago-sun-times three-stars out of four, writing that the-chicago-sun-times "rarely comes close to touching-greatness, but the-chicago-sun-times's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality-filmmaking."
the-a.v.-club's-a.-a.-dowd gave the-chicago-sun-times a-c+, stating that the-chicago-sun-times "is so freighted with obligation that the-chicago-sun-times almost groans under the-weight, flashing a-weak-smile as it vaguely approximates the-appearance of a-zippy-good-time."
michael-phillips for chicago-tribune wrote that the-chicago-sun-times "does the-job.
the-chicago-sun-times wraps up the-trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a-confident,-soothingly-predictable-way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the]-tradition-minded-quadrants of the-star-wars-fan-base. "
lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle described the-film as "a-disappointment" and wrote, "for all-the-movie's-faults, it's likely that most-people will consider the-rise of skywalker and accept the-trade: sit through a
so-so-110-minutes to get to a-strong-half-hour.
owen-gleiberman of variety called the filmthe most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying star-wars-adventure since the-glory-days of star-wars (1977) and the empire strikes back (1980) [...]
but given the-last-eight-films, the-bar isn't that high.
" the-bbc's-nicholas-barber praised the-film's-acting and wrote, "the-rise of skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a-host of talented-people, and yet the best the-rise of skywalker can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago. "
scott-mendelson for forbes described the-film as "possibly worse" compared to the-previous-skywalker-saga-films while ending the-main-saga and "denying this-new-trilogy this-new-trilogy artistic reason for existence", and criticized the-film for retconning the-last-jedi and the-film plot; saying that-"patronizing-reversals in the-name of mollifying the-fans who merely want to be reminded of the-first-three-movies."
justin-chang of the-los-angeles-times described the-film as "a-last-jedi-corrective", which is "more-accurate-way to describe the-film" and is "an-epic-failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a-retreat, a return to a-zone of emotional-and-thematic-safety from a-filmmaker with a-gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
" writing for the-new-yorker, richard-brody states that the-film's-faults "are those of the-franchise over all"; as the-film's-director "j.-j.-abrams is mainly a-distiller and a-magnifier and brings virtually-no-originality to it", using the-controls of michael-bay.
whereas asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran was a-main-character in the-last-jedi, asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran appears for about-a-minute in the-rise of skywalker.
the-reduced-role was interpreted by some-critics as a-concession to fans who disliked asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran-character; asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran had been a-target of online-harassment following the-release of the-last-jedi.
people involved on the-film defended asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran, with some claiming some of the-attackers were racist, and body shamers.
critics said  critics was "sidelined" into a-minor-character, and commented on how  critics was written out "without any-explanation" and  critics minor role was considered by one-critic to be "one of the-film's-biggest-disappointments".
in regards to the-criticism towards  critics reduced screen-time, screenwriter-chris-terrio said it was due to the-difficulty of including the-deceased-carrie-fisher-archive-footage in scenes planned to feature both-characters.
audience-response ===
according to cinemascore, american-audiences gave the-film an-average-grade of "b+" on an-a+ to f-scale, the lowest among the-live-action-films.
on posttrak, audiences gave  on posttrak an-average-four-stars out of five, with 70% saying audiences would definitely recommend  on posttrak
; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening-night-attendance) gave
on posttrak
a-full-five-stars out of five.
men (who made up 67% of the-audience) gave  on posttrak an-overall-positive-score of 80% while women (32%) gave
on posttrak an 84%.
relishmix, which tracks social-media-posts and online-presence, "noticed a-divided-reaction to skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
months prior to
on posttrak's-trailer-release,  on posttrak was review bombed on rotten-tomatoes to the-point where the "want to see" percentage went down as far as 5% within a-day, with many of the-reviews focusing on lingering-negativity towards the-last-jedi.
similar-bombing with captain-marvel (2019) caused rotten-tomatoes to completely remove the "want to see"  feature after temporarily changing similar-bombing with captain-marvel (2019) to a-number.
accolades === ==
notes == ==
references ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at lucasfilm.com-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker at imdb-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker-skywalker at allmovie
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki star warsskywalker , is an-american-actress.
she began acting in 2011, with most of she roles being in short-film and television.
she came to global-prominence for she role as rose-tico in the-star-wars
sequel-trilogy-films
the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
she voiced raya in the-animated-film raya and the-last-dragon (2021).
early-life ==
kelly-marie-tran was born on january 17, 1989, in san-diego, california.
kelly-marie-tran-parents were refugees from vietnam who fled the-country following the vietnam war.
as a-child, kelly-marie-tran-father was homeless and grew up on the-streets of vietnam.
after moving to the-united-states, her-father worked at burger-king to support the-family, and kelly-marie-tran-mother worked at a-funeral-home.
tran attended westview-high-school in san-diego and worked at a-yogurt-shop to earn money for head-shots.
tran then graduated from ucla with a-b.a. in communications.
career == ===
2011–2014:
early-work ===
early-work ===
early-credits consisted of primarily-collegehumor-videos and small-tv-roles.
early-work === landed a-commercial-agent in 2011, who got tran to take improv-classes at the-upright-citizens-brigade.
at the-second-city, tran is part of the-all-female,-asian-american-improv-group, number-one-son.
in 2013, tran starred in the-web-series-ladies like us.
in 2015, tran was working as an-assistant at a-creative-recruiting-firm in century-city.
2015–2019:
star-wars ==
in 2015, tran was cast as rose-tico in star-wars: the-last-jedi.
rose-tico is a-rebel-mechanic who joins up with main-character-finn after the-sacrifice of  rose-tico oldest sister, paige-tico (veronica-ngo), a gunner trained by resistance-commander-poe-dameron.
when  rose-tico went to shoot  rose-tico scenes in england in early 2016,  rose-tico was required to keep  rose-tico role secret, so  rose-tico told  rose-tico family
rose-tico was making an-independent-film in canada.
the-last-jedi made tran the first asian-american woman to have a-major-role in a-star-wars-film.
in 2017,  rose-tico also became the-first-asian-woman to appear on the-cover of vanity-fair when  rose-tico appeared on the-cover of the-summer-2017-issue with actor-john-boyega (who played finn), and oscar-isaac (who played x-wing-fighter-pilot-poe-dameron).tran plays the-lead-role of kaitlin-le in radiotopia's-mystery-thriller-podcast, passenger-list.
rose-tico was a-series regular on the-facebook-watch-series sorry for your-loss.
=== 2020–present
tran voiced raya in the walt disney animation studios production raya and the-last-dragon, replacing cassie-steele.
tran was to play val-little in the upcoming disney+
series-monsters at work, but has since been replaced by mindy-kaling.
tran has also been cast as dawn in the-film
the-croods: a-new-age, replacing kat-dennings.
personal-life == ===
online-attacks and harassment ===
following the-release of star-wars: the-last-jedi (2017), tran became the-subject of racist-and-misogynistic-attacks over the-internet, including insults about tran ethnicity and weight.
tran was the-target of racist-trolling on twitter; in one-example, internet-personality-paul-ray-ramsey mocked tran weight.
in december 2017, tran-character-rose-tico's-entry on wookieepedia, an-online-encyclopedia about the-star-wars-universe, was edited to include racist-and-vulgar-comments, which drew national-media-attention.
fandom, the-wiki-hosting-service that operated the-domain, removed the-offensive-edits, protected the-page, and publicly condemned the-vandalism.
after months of online-harassment, tran deleted all of tran instagram posts in june 2018, and replaced the-account-bio with, "afraid, but doing it anyway.
" she also pursued therapy following the-harassment.
subsequently, several-cast-and-crew-members of the-last-jedi condemned the-attacks and spoke out in defense of tran, including writer-director-rian-johnson and actors-john-boyega, domhnall-gleeson, and mark-hamill, the last of whom tweeted a-picture of himself with tran and wrote the-caption, "what's not to love?
getalifenerds".
johnson branded the-attackers as "manbabies", and said the-attackers represent a-"few-unhealthy-people" and not-the-"vast-majority" of star-wars-fans.
other-celebrities voiced support for tran as well, including stephen-colbert, josh-gad, kumail-nanjiani, gabrielle-union, elijah-wood, and edgar-wright.
in less-than-one-day, more-than-20,000-fans retweeted a-message of support for tran from a-fan on twitter that sought to "drown out the-manbabies".
tran was also shown support at the-2018-san-diego-comic-con during a-"rally for rose", where fans appeared in cosplay-attire as tran star wars character rose tico or wore "rose for hope" t-shirts.
fans posted about the-event on social-media using the-hashtags #forceouthate and #rallyforrose.
after a-prolonged-stretch of silence about her-harassment, tran wrote an-essay on the-subject for the-new-york-times entitled "kelly marie tran: i won't be marginalized by online-harassment", which ran on august 21, 2018.
her described how the-matter made her self-conscious, writing that the-attacks reinforced microaggressions her had long faced as a vietnamese-american, and which sought to reinforce a-narrative that asians should be marginalized and treated only as minor-characters, both in stories and in real-life.
tran further wrote that the-ordeal came to a-point when tran began to believe the-negative-remarks made about tran, stating they had sent tran "down a-spiral of self-hate, into the-darkest-recesses of my-mind, places where i tore tran apart, where i put they words above my own self-worth."
tran concluded with, "you might know me as kelly.
i am the-first-woman of color to have a-leading-role in a-star-wars-movie.
i am the-first-asian-woman to appear on the-cover of vanity-fair.
my-real-name is loan.
and i am just getting started."
tran later said the-essay was difficult to write, but also "probably one of the-proudest-moments of [tran] career thus far."
filmography == ===
film === ===
television ===
awards and nominations == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
kelly-marie-tran at imdb
kelly-marie-tran at rotten-tomatoes
fennec-shand is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise who appears in the-disney+-television-series the-mandalorian, and the-upcoming-the-bad-batch and the-book of boba-fett.
an elite mercenary and assassin, she was introduced in  "chapter 5: the-gunslinger" of the-mandalorian, in which she is sought by the-title-character and another--bounty-hunter, toro-calican,
the latter of whom seemingly kills she.
in "chapter 14:
the-tragedy", the-tragedy" was established that fennec was saved by the-bounty-hunter-boba-fett, and had parts of fennec body replaced with cybernetics.
fennec serves as fett's-new-partner and assists fett in fett mission to recover fett old armor from the-mandalorian, and later to rescue grogu in order to honor an-agreement made with the latter.
once   mission is completed, the two conquer tatooine and the remnants of the-hutt-cartels.
portrayed by actress-ming-na-wen, elements of the-character's-personality were inspired by the-fennec-fox, including its-trickiness, stealthiness, maneuverability, and ability to survive.
the-fox also influenced the-design of fennec's-costume and hairstyle.
costume-designer-joseph-porro incorporated orange-accents into fennec's-black-costume, and wen recommended the-character's-hair include braids inspired by the-fox.
fennec-shand has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.
appearances == ===
the mandalorian ===
in the-mandalorian ==, fennec-shand is presented as an-elite-mercenary and assassin who developed a-significant-reputation committing murders for the-galaxy's-top-crime-syndicates, including the-hutts, before the-galaxy's-top-crime-syndicates, including the-hutts leaders were imprisoned by the-new-republic.
little else about her-backstory is revealed.
her appears in the-mandalorian-episode "chapter 5: the gunslinger", starting the-episode in hiding on the-desert-planet-tatooine, because a-large-bounty has been placed upon her.
toro-calican, an-aspiring-bounty-hunter, takes a-large-bounty on fennec as his-first-assignment, believing capturing such-a-notorious-target would bring his-prestige and allow his to join the-bounty-hunters'-guild.
toro recruits the-show's-protagonist, a-bounty-hunter known as "the-mandalorian", to help his-find and capture her.
they track fennec to a-part of the-planet known as the-dune-sea, where they discover the-dead-body of another-bounty-hunter she had previously killed.
while they investigate, fennec opens fire on they with a-long-ranged-blaster-rifle, keeping they pinned down from a-high-vantage-point.
the-mandalorian eventually charge toward her-position on speeder-bikes and use flash-charges to temporarily blind and distract her.
after a-brief-fight, they are able to incapacitate fennec, and restrain her with handcuffs.
when the-mandalorian temporarily departs to secure them transportation, fennec informs toro that the-mandalorian is wanted by the-bounty-hunters-guild, and that capturing him would bring toro a-legendary-reputation.
fennec offered to work with toro to subdue the-mandalorian and turn toro over to the-bounty-hunters-guild.
instead, toro fatally shot fennec in the-stomach, believing she would have killed fennec if fennec had released she.
toro decides to attempt to capture the-mandalorian himself, and leaves fennec's-body in the-desert. "
chapter 5:
the-gunslinger" ends with an-unidentified-person wearing boots and a-cape walking up to fennec's-body to investigate.
shand returns in the-second-season-episode "chapter 14:
the-tragedy", in which it is revealed that she was rescued by boba-fett, who nursed she back to health using cybernetics and recruited she as his-partner.
she accompanies fett to tython, where they attempt to recover the-latter's-old-armor from the-mandalorian, and ensure the-safety of grogu, a-force-sensitive-alien-infant that the-mandalorian has adopted, in exchange for the-armor's-return.
when moff-gideon's-imperial-remnant attacks the-group, fennec helps the mandalorian and fett fend off the-stormtroopers deployed to capture grogu, but fail to prevent fett from being taken by gideon's-dark-troopers.
to repay their-debt to the-mandalorian for returning fett's-armor, fett and fennec aid fett efforts to rescue grogu in both-"chapter 15:
the-believer" and ''
chapter 16:
the-rescue''.
at the-conclusion of the-latter-episode, fennec and fett return to tatooine and kill bib-fortuna, who has been in charge of jabba the-hutt's-palace since his-death.
fett then sits on the-throne that once belonged to jabba, with fennec at fett side, which sets the-stage for the-two-characters'-upcoming-spin-off-series, titled the book of boba fett.
the-bad-batch ===
a-younger-fennec will appear in the-animated-series star-wars: the-bad-batch, with ming-na-wen returning to voice the-character.
the-book of boba-fett ===
a-younger-fennec will appear in the-book of boba-fett, scheduled to be released in december 2021, with ming-na-wen reprising ming-na-wen role.
==-characterization ==
fennec-shand is portrayed as an-elite-assassin, one who is mysterious and very dangerous.
fennec-shand is a-highly-skilled-fighter at both-firearms and hand-to-hand combat, and displays a-sharpshooter's-ability with a-sniper-rifle.
fennec-shand is very graceful and agile, and stealthy, demonstrating an-ability to maneuver and survive.
ming-na-wen, the-actress who portrays fennec, felt the-character has a-moral-ambiguity similar to that of popular-star-wars-character-han-solo.
she is also very tricky, playing mind-games with she victims, as demonstrated by she
attempts to manipulate toro-calican once captured.
anthony-breznican of vanity-fair has noted that the-character is rather talkative in this-way, in contrast to the-usually-stoic-and-silent-title-character, the-mandalorian.
she feels the-character "has a-good-sense of humor about it all as well".
nevertheless, she also at times demonstrates a-gruff-and-reserved-personality.
fennec is ruthless, independent, unpredictable, and is loyal to she first and foremost.
she occasionally shows errors in judgement, like when she fatally underestimates the-ruthlessness of toro-calican.
portrayal ==
fennec-shand is portrayed by ming-na-wen.
it marks one of several-notable-performances by ming-na-wen in walt-disney-company-projects, including voicing mulan in the-animated-films mulan (1998) and mulan ii (2004), and portraying melinda-may on the-marvel-series-agents of s.h.i.e.l.d.-patrick-hipes of deadline-hollywood called this a "disney franchise trifecta".
wen has jokingly said of disney: "please just keep acquiring all-these-different-franchises, because i just keep getting employed by all-these-different-franchises.
i have hit every-bucket-list thanks to disney.
wen was a-fan of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, and as one of the-few-asian-girls growing up in mt.-lebanon, pennsylvania during  wen childhood,  wen could relate in particular to the-character luke-skywalker and  wen dreams of a-more-meaningful-life.
wen said: "just that image of  wen looking at the-binary-suns and wishing for more, it always stays with  wen."
wen has described star-wars as  wen "favorite-all-time-genre".
wen grew up in the-same-town as the-mandalorian-executive-producer dave-filoni, who also directed the-episode in which  wen appears.
wen is the-first-major-star-wars-villain-character portrayed by an-asian-actress.
wen said  wen is pleased there has been more-representation of asians among the-casts of star-wars-projects in recent-years, citing kelly-marie-tran's-character rose-tico in star-wars: the-last-jedi (2017) as another-example.
wen noted that the-star-wars-franchise has often been influenced by asian-culture in the-star-wars-franchise costumes and set design-elements, despite an-earlier-lack of asian-actors.
wen said: "there was all-this-incredible-imagery, but yet there were very-few-asians in the-films.
any-sort of representation is important and necessary.
and i’m just happy that i got chosen. "
after attending the-premiere for the-mandalorian on november 13, 2019, wen posted photos from the-event on twitter and wrote: " what a night!
if you told my-13-yr-old-self that i’d be on the-red-carpet celebrating being in a-@starwars-project, she’d think you were nuts!
well, that-little-girl inside me still think that-little-girl inside me’s nuts!"
development ==
elements of fennec-shand's-personality and development were inspired by the-character's-name, which wen said brought to mind the-idea of the-namesake-fennec-fox.
anthony-breznican of vanity-fair noted the-fennec-fox is a-particularly-appropriate-model for the-character because, like fennec-shand, it is both-predator and prey.
wen felt the-character shared common-attributes with the-fennec-fox, including trickiness, stealthiness, maneuverability, and the-ability to survive.
the-character of fennec-shan and casting of wen were first announced at the-d23-expo in anaheim, california on august 23, 2019.
bob-iger, ceo of the-walt-disney-company, announced the-news on the-same-day that wen was named one of the-disney-legends for wen past work in disney works.
footage of fennec-shand was first publicly shown in a-30-second-teaser-trailer for the-mandalorian released on november 4, 2019.
the-teaser concluded with a-shot of fennec delivering the-line: "your-name will be legendary."
abbey-white said the-character was "eagerly anticipated" by the-time the-mandalorian premiered.
costume ==
fennec-shand's-costume was created by joseph-porro, the-costume-designer for the-mandalorian.
a black, leather outfit of armor with broad-shoulders and accents of orange, it was inspired by the-fennec-fox referenced in the-character's-name.
wen referred to  wen as an-"amazing-outfit that i fell in love with right away".
original-plans for fennec's-hair called for original-plans for fennec's-hair to be loose and unkempt, but  wen suggested  wen hairstyle include some of "the-fennec-fox-architecture", similar to the-costume.
wen also felt the-original-plan was too similar to the-long,-flowing-hair of  wen melinda may character on agents of s.h.i.e.l.d., and  wen wanted the-two-characters to be more differentiated.
wen brought these-ideas to dave-filoni and the-mandalorian-creator and showrunner-jon-favreau, and dave-filoni and the-mandalorian-creator and showrunner-jon-favreau responded enthusiastically.
as a-result, the-hairstylist on the-mandalorian conceived a-braiding-system with triangular-points, similar to the-ears of a-fennec-fox.
the-braids are pulled back tight against wen-head and threaded with orange, which was also influenced by the-fennec-fox-animal.
wen said felt the-hairstyle "gives wen such-a-strong,-unique-look".
reception ==
fennec-shand has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
izak-bulten of screen-rant wrote: "despite appearing in just-one-episode,  izak-bulten of screen-rant had a-clear,-well-realized-character and has quickly become a favorite amongst fans of the-series.
men's-health-writer-evan-romano said "in only-a-few-lines, men's-health-writer-evan-romano has already had some-very-impressive-lore built around  izak-bulten of screen-rant".
vanity-fair-writer-anthony-breznican felt men's-health-writer evan-romano continued a-positive-and-significant-trend of greater-diversity in star-wars casting, citing other-examples of asian-actors in recent-projects such as kelly-marie-tran in the-last-jedi and christopher-sean in star-wars resistance.
joanna-robinson, also of vanity-fair, praised men's-health-writer evan-romano, saying  izak-bulten of screen-rant had a-"coiled-power in  izak-bulten of screen-rant", and complimented the-casting of wen.
jackson-mchenry of vulture praised wen's-performance, and called the-character "one of the-badder-ass-badasses in the-world of the-mandalorian".
fennec-shand was included on vulture's-list of the-show's-15-best-cameo-appearances from season one.
prior to fennec-shand return in the-second-season, several-reviewers felt fennec-shand was eliminated too quickly and did not get the-chance to live up to fennec-shand potential.
joanna-robinson said joanna-robinson would have preferred a-full-episode of word-play between fennec and the-mandalorian, and said of fennec's role in the-episode:
"there's a-real-potential there, and it was over too quickly for my-taste.
i would've loved more of it."
dirk-libbey of cinemablend called the-character "criminally underused", and allie-gemmill of inverse called allie-gemmill of inverse death "hasty".
breznican said, "there's way-too-much-potential for that-character to just vanish like this."
keith-phipps of vulture wrote that keith-phipps of vulture "seemed too clever to be taken out so easily by a-rookie".
kerr-lordygan of tv-fanatic wrote that "fennec's-demise was too easily obtained, though the-possibility of keith-phipps of vulture-return was left open".
several-reviewers correctly speculated that the-character was still alive, with some-arguing
this is foreshadowed by the-final-scene of "chapter 5: the-gunslinger", during which a-mysterious-stranger investigates her-body.
allie-gemmill called the-final-scene of "chapter 5: the-gunslinger", during which a-mysterious-stranger investigates her-body "one of the-most-tantalizing-closings to a-mandalorian-episode since the-series-premiere revealed baby-yoda".
dirk-libbey called the-mysterious-character's-identity and dirk-libbey interest in fennec "one of our-bigger-cliffhanger-moments" from the-series.
evan-romano said evan-romano would not be surprised to see fennec-shand turn up again in a-future-star-wars-film or series, writing: "this-character seems just a little too capable, and a little too cool to be disarmed and killed after just-a-single-brief-appearance".
stephanie-dube-dwilson of heavy.com said  stephanie-dube-dwilson of heavy.com
so-enjoyed-wen's-acting that  stephanie-dube-dwilson of heavy.com hopes the-character returns.
references == ===
citations ===
works cited ===-wen, ming-na; breznican, anthony; robinson, joanna (december 6, 2019).
still watching: the mandalorian—'chapter five: the-gunslinger' with bryce-dallas-howard and ming-na-wen".
vanity-fair (podcast).
retrieved january 29, 2020.
external-links ==
fennec-shand on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
the-tenth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was confirmed on 1-november 2014, and began airing on 7-april 2015.
this will be the-first-series not to include original-cast-member-vicky-pattison after she departed at the-end of the-previous-series.
ahead of  the-tenth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne it was confirmed that new-cast-members chloe-ferry and nathan-henry had joined the-show.
aaron-chalmers
charlotte-letitia-crosby-chloe
ferry-gary-beadle-holly-hagan-james-tindale
kyle-christie-marnie-simpson-nathan-henry-scott-timlin ===
duration of cast === =
cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member arrives in the-house.
= cast-member voluntarily leaves the-house.
cast-member leaves and returns to the-house in the-same-episode.
cast-member returns to the-house.
cast-member leaves the-series.
cast-member does not feature in this-episode.
cast-member is not officially a-cast-member in this-episode.
episodes == ==
ratings == ==
references ==
the-eighth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was confirmed in october 2013 after cast-member-holly-hagan announced  the-eighth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne on twitter and is expected to air 22 july 2014.
filming began for  the-eighth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne on 25-march 2014.
the-eighth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne will be the first not to feature former-cast-member-sophie-kasaei after former-cast-member-sophie-kasaei was axed during the-seventh-series following a-racial-slur.
all-other-cast-members from  the-eighth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne return with the-addition of new-cast-member-aaron-chalmers who had briefly appeared during series two of the-show as a-one-night-stand of holly's.
in may 2014, gaz announced that  the-eighth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne would begin in july.
an-exclusive-first-trailer for the-series was released during an-episode of ex-on the-beach on 3-june 2014.
an-exclusive-first-trailer for the-series was revealed on 10-june 2014 that another-new-cast-member had joined, 21-year-old-kyle-christie.
aaron-chalmers-charlotte-letitia-crosby
gary-beadle-holly-hagan-james-tindale
kyle-christie-marnie-simpson
scott-timlin-vicky-pattison == =
duration of cast ===
cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member arrives in the-house.
cast-member voluntarily leaves the-house.
cast-member leaves and returns to the-house in the-same-episode.
cast-member returns to the-house.
cast-member does not feature in the-same-episode.
cast-member is not officially a-cast-member in this-episode.
episodes == ==
ratings == ==
references ==
rey, also known as rey skywalker, is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise and the-main-protagonist of the-sequel-film-trilogy.
rey was created by lawrence-kasdan, j.-j.-abrams, and michael-arndt for the force awakens (2015), the-first-installment of the-sequel-film-trilogy, and is portrayed by daisy-ridley.
she also appears in the-film's-sequels, the-last-jedi (2017) and the-rise of skywalker (2019), and related-star-wars-media.
rey is introduced as a-scavenger who was left behind on the-planet-jakku when rey was a-child.
rey later becomes involved with the-resistance's-conflict with the-first-order.
powerful with the-force, rey trains to be a-jedi under luke-skywalker and general-leia, and faces adversaries such as supreme-leader-snoke, kylo-ren, and the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine—who is revealed to be rey grandfather in the-rise of skywalker.
rey later adopts the-name "skywalker" to honor rey mentors and the-family-legacy.
reception to the-character and ridley's-performance has been highly positive.
ridley has garnered multiple-accolades for ridley performances as rey, including two-saturn-award-nominations.
development == ===
creation and casting ===
screenwriter-michael-arndt said that screenwriter-michael-arndt found lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy's-offer to write episode-vii daunting in mid-2012, but screenwriter-michael-arndt became interested when it was explained to screenwriter-michael-arndt that the-tale was about the-origin-story of a-female-jedi and screenwriter-michael-arndt met with george-lucas.
the-character was known as kira in the-early-stages of production, and screenwriter-michael-arndt described kira as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
screenwriter-michael-arndt said that screenwriter-michael-arndt struggled with introducing the-young-woman as the-main-character in the-origin-story of a-female-jedi while keeping kira from being overshadowed after kira early meeting with luke-skywalker, whose-role in the-film was eventually minimized.
ridley recalled that-director and writer-j.-j.-abrams originally intended to name the-character "keera"  [sic], but during filming in abu-dhabi, writer-j.-j.-abrams revealed to ridley that ridley was thinking of going with "rey".
on creating a-female-lead for the-new-trilogy, abrams stated that from abrams initial discussions with writer-lawrence-kasdan, abrams was excited at the-concept of having a-woman at the-center of the-story.
abrams said that "we always wanted to write rey as the-central-character" and that other-female-representation in the-story was also important.
kennedy stated that, "rey is the-new-generation's-luke-skywalker.
rey's-background as a-scavenger was part of the-developers attempting to portray her as "the-ultimate-outsider and the-ultimate-disenfranchised-person", due to their-belief that a-person of that-nature would likely experience a-prolonged-journey compared to other-types of people.
daisy-ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the-role of rey.
daisy-ridley said that  daisy-ridley auditioned many times for the-role over the-course of seven-months and had to keep  daisy-ridley casting a-secret for three-months.
daisy-ridley was announced as part of the-cast at the-end of april 2014.
daisy-ridley only had experience with small-parts in tv-shows.
daisy-ridley-inexperience and lack of exposure were a-crucial-part of what convinced abrams to give  daisy-ridley the-role, as the-previous-installments had featured relatively-unknown-talent that would not experience heightened-degrees of scrutiny.
abrams stated that ridley "was so funny and had a-great-spark", as well as having ridley act out an-emotional-scene, proclaiming that "ridley nailed it on the-first-take."
abrams went on to praise ridley, saying, "ridley was born with this-gift to be in a-moment and make this-gift ridley own.
ridley simultaneously works from the-inside out and the outside in."
kennedy proclaimed, "ridley had a-physicality and a-self-confidence that was so important to the-character we were looking for.
ridley epitomizes that-optimism where anything is possible."
director-dusan-lazarevic, who was present at the-casting of ridley for a-role in british-drama-series-silent-witness, in addition to praising ridley acting range, stated, "ridley showed a-combination of vulnerability and strength which gave ridley a-complexity, and there was an-intelligence in ridley eyes that was an-indicator
ridley could play quite-a-complicated-part."
cailey-fleming was additionally cast to portray a-young-rey.
although ridley said ridley was "riddled with doubts and insecurities", ridley said that a-young-rey's-hopefulness is what ridley related to most : it "was something driving me through the-auditions—even though it felt so insanely out of anything that i could've imagined. "
ridley recalled  ridley shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with abrams telling  ridley that  ridley
first-few-takes were "wooden".
but ridley and abrams had an-"incredibly-collaborative"-process creating rey;  ridley recalled that the-character "changed from when ridley and abrams first began,  ridley became softer.
and i think that's probably me, because americans tend not to understand me, so it helped, slowing down the-speech and everything just made it softer than i am."
ridley has said that rey will have "some-impact in a-girl-power-y-way", adding that the-character "doesn't have to be one-thing to embody a-woman in a-film.
it just so happens  ridley's-a-woman
but she transcends gender.
she's going to speak to men and women.
in an-interview with elle, ridley said, "she's so strong.
she's cool and smart and she can look after she," adding, "young-girls can look at she and know that young-girls can wear trousers if young-girls want to.
that they don't have to show off they-bodies. "
composer-john-williams said composer-john-williams immediately loved ridley in the-film and found composing ridley theme an-interesting-challenge.
composer-john-williams said that her-theme does not suggest a-love-theme, but rather a-strong-female-adventurer-character infused with the-force for a-mature,-thoughtful-theme.
composer-john-williams added that the-"musical-grammar" of rey's-theme is not heroic, but conveys "an-adventurous-tone that needs to illustrate empathy."
characterization ===
rey is introduced as a-19-year-old-woman in the force awakens.
rey is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce-loyalty to rey friends.
matthew-yglesias of vox wrote, "rey is considerably less callow than luke".
ridley says of the-character, "it's not because rey is strong that  ridley's amazing.
it's all-the-complexities of a-human.
it's because  ridley is a-well-drawn-person who is struggling with things and you're with  ridley. "
rey is highly force-sensitive, which is revealed when  ridley is presented with the-lightsaber first owned by anakin-skywalker, then rey son luke.
without training, she is able to use the-force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
kylo-ren in a-duel.
on the-mirror-invoking-vision rey-experiences in the-last-jedi, writer and director rian-johnson said that it represents the character learning that she has to connect with she.
appearances ==
film === ====
the-force awakens (2015) ====
rey is first introduced as an-orphan living alone on the-desert-planet jakku, scraping a-living through scavenging parts from ships.
she rescues the-astromech-droid bb-8 and encounters finn (john-boyega), a-former-stormtrooper.
attacked by first-order-troops, rey steals and pilots the-millennium-falcon to evade finn (john-boyega), a-former-stormtrooper and escape jakku.
smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) take back the-millennium-falcon in smuggler-han-solo (harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) freighter ship.
she saves finn and smuggler han-solo
(harrison-ford) and wookiee-chewbacca (peter-mayhew) escape the-freighter in the-millennium-falcon.
impressed with rey's-bravery and piloting-skill, han offers she a-job on the-millennium-falcon; however, rey declines rey offer, feeling that she has to return to jakku.
after   convene at maz-kanata's-(lupita-nyong'o)-castle on the-planet
takodana to return bb-8 to the-resistance, the-first-order is alerted to their-presence.
rey visits maz-kanata's-(lupita-nyong'o)-castle on the-planet's-basement-vault in which maz has stored a-lightsaber that once belonged to luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) and maz father before maz.
upon touching it, rey experiences a-terrifying-vision: rey sees a-battle led by first-order-enforcer-kylo-ren (adam-driver), a-flashback of rey younger self being left behind on jakku, and a-vision of luke, the-last-jedi-master in the-galaxy, who has been missing for several-years.
maz debates that whoever abandoned rey will never return to jakku, and rey only option is to seek out strength in the-force.
feeling overwhelmed, rey rejects the-lightsaber and flees into the-forest.
the-first-order attacks maz's-castle, and ren captures rey when the-resistance arrives.
ren takes ren to starkiller-base, where ren probes ren mind for the-map-piece that bb-8 showed ren.
ren uses the-force to read rey's-mind, revealing rey feels that han is like the-father ren never had.
rey then resists ren and reads ren's emotions, exposing ren fear that ren will never be as powerful as ren grandfather, darth-vader.
ren reports to  ren master, supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), who commands that rey should be brought before  ren.
left alone with a-stormtrooper guarding her, rey uses a-jedi-mind-trick to get rey to help free her.
after sneaking around inside the-base looking for a-way to escape, her is elated to find finn, han, and chewbacca have come for her.
han, and chewbacca watch in horror as  ren kills  ren own father, han.
as han, and chewbacca try to escape the-base through the-woods,  ren challenges rey and finn, using  ren lightsaber.
after ren seriously injures finn and disarms him of luke's-lightsaber, rey uses the-force to retrieve the-weapon and battles ren ren.
initially overpowered, rey rejects ren's-offer to train ren and uses the-force with the-lightsaber, disfiguring ren face.
after escaping the-destroyed-base in the-millennium-falcon with chewbacca and the-wounded-finn, ren returns to the-destroyed-base in the-millennium-falcon.
while the-resistance celebrates the-victory, rey mourns han's-death with leia-organa (carrie-fisher) and visits finn, who is still unconscious.
ren decides to seek out luke's-location, using information provided by bb-8-and-the-re-activated-r2-d2-(kenny-baker).
rey, chewbacca, and r2-travel in the-falcon to the-oceanic-planet of ahch-to; upon finding luke, rey presents rey with rey longtime lightsaber.
related-works and merchandising =====
rey is featured in star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers that focuses on the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
rey's-survival-guide (2015) by jason-fry is a-first-person-account from rey's-perspective about rey's-survival-guide (2015) by jason-fry and rey's-survival-guide (2015) by jason-fry home planet of jakku.
rey is also a-point of view-character in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
fans noticed a-lack of tie-in-toys featuring  rey.
hasbro released a-version of monopoly based on the force awakens that excluded the--rey-character.
after receiving criticism, hasbro stated that hasbro did not include  rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including  rey in future-toy-releases.
paul-southern, the-head of lucasfilm-licensing, said that paul-southern, the-head of lucasfilm-licensing wanted to protect the-secrets that "the-force awakens in  rey" and that her-character carries a-lightsaber.
he said that demand for rey-products was underestimated.
abrams said, "i will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the-main-character of the-movie is not well represented in what is clearly a-huge-piece of the-star-wars-world in terms of merchandising."
regarding rey's-relative-absence in star-wars-merchandising, cbbc-presenter-and-voice-actor-christopher-johnson stated: "it still baffles me to this-day that some-toy-manufacturers don't think that girls want to play with 'superhero'-toys and that-boys aren't interested in female-characters."
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
rey is one of the-key-characters of the-last-jedi.
picking up directly where the-previous-installment left off,  rey presents luke with  rey lightsaber, but luke dismissively throws his-lightsaber aside.
luke eventually agrees to teach  rey the-ways of the-force.
rey demonstrates immense-raw-strength and a-clear-temptation toward the-dark-side of the-force that reminds luke of kylo-ren, who was once his-nephew and student, ben-solo.
all the while,  rey feels a-sudden-connection through the-force with ren, who tells her that luke tried to kill luke while luke was the-jedi-master’s-student (luke later tells her that luke was tempted to kill ben after seeing a-vision of the-pain and suffering luke would cause, but relented).
in one of their-conversations, rey and ren touch hands, and through this rey swears that rey is able to feel conflict within ren, and becomes determined to turn ren back to the-light-side.
rey asks luke once more to come with rey and rejoin the-resistance, but rey declines.
so, rey, chewbacca, and r2-d2 leave without rey, and rey goes to meet ren in the-supremacy.
ren takes rey-prisoner and brings ren before snoke.
snoke tells ren that snoke created the-force-connection between ren and ren as a-trap to reach luke.
snoke-tortures and taunts rey, showing her the-attack on the-resistance-transports, and eventually orders ren to kill her.
ren instead kills snoke, and ren and rey fight snoke's guards side by side.
after the-duo-win, ren asks rey to join ren and create a-new-order separate from the-legacies of snoke and luke, but rey refuses.
in an-attempt to get her to turn, ren gets rey to admit that ren parents abandoned ren.
despite the-revelation, rey refuses to join ren and uses the-force to summon luke's-lightsaber, but ren does so, too, resulting in a-standoff that ultimately breaks luke's-lightsaber.
shortly afterwards, resistance leader vice admiral holdo (laura-dern) rams resistance leader vice admiral holdo (laura-dern) cruiser into snoke's-flagship, separating rey from ren.
rey subsequently uses snoke's-escape-craft to flee the-dreadnought as later stated by general-hux.
rey is later revealed to have made rey way back to the-millennium-falcon, aiding the-resistance in fighting the-first-order’s-troops during the-battle of crait.
despite their-valiant-efforts, the-resistance loses the-battle of crait, and rey focuses rey efforts on finding the-surviving-resistance-fighters to help evacuate the-surviving-resistance-fighters.
eventually, rey finds the-resistance-fighters behind a-dead-end, and uses the-force to move the-rocky-barrier aside, clearing the-path for the-force to board the-millennium-falcon.
rey reunites with finn and leia and meets poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) for the-first-time aboard the-falcon.
rey feels luke’s-death through the-force, and reassures leia that he met he end with "peace and purpose".
as she holds the-leftovers of luke's-lightsaber,  rey asks leia how they can rebuild the-resistance from what remains, and leia, gesturing towards  rey, says that they now have all they need.
unbeknownst to leia, that includes the-fact that  rey stole the-sacred-jedi-texts from luke before yoda's-(frank-oz)-ghost burned the-tree-cave they were in.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ====
rey is the-main-protagonist of the-trilogy's-final-film, the-rise of skywalker, which is set one year after the-events of the-last-jedi.
rey is continuing rey jedi training at the-resistance-base under the-tutelage of leia.
the-resistance announces that the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) has been manipulating events from the-sith-world-exegol and has built a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—the final order.
rey discovers from luke's-old-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead a-sith-wayfinder to exegol.
rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, c-3po, and bb-8 leave for pasaana, where a-clue to the-wayfinder's-location is hidden.
rey locates the-clue—a-dagger with sith-inscriptions—with the-help of lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams).
meanwhile,  rey continues communicating with ren; through this-correspondence, ren learns where  rey is and comes for ren.
rey confronts ren, inadvertently allowing chewbacca to be taken aboard a-first-order-transport.
attempting to save chewbacca, rey accidentally destroys the-transport with force-lightning, seemingly killing chewbacca.
rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to finn that rey has been having visions of rey and ren sitting on the-sith-throne.
rey and the-others travel to kijimi, where programmer-babu-frik extracts the-location of the-wayfinder—the-moon-kef-bir—from c-3po's-memory-files.
ren and the-first-order follow rey to kijimi.
rey senses chewbacca is alive and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission.
rey retrieves the-dagger aboard ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer steadfast and has visions of ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer parents being killed with it; ren informs ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer that ren's-resurgent-class-star-destroyer is palpatine's-granddaughter.
palpatine had fathered a-son who renounced palpatine; palpatine and palpatine wife hid  rey on jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect his-wife.
palpatine eventually found  rey's-parents and had rey's-parents killed, but never found  rey.
ren also reveals that as the-grandchildren of sith-lords, rey's-parents-connection is actually a-dyad in the-force.
ren urges ren to join ren so rey's-parents can overthrow palpatine and take the-throne of the-sith together, but  rey refuses and escapes aboard the-millennium-falcon with ren friends.
together, they travel to kef-bir where rey retrieves the-wayfinder on the-remains of the-second-death-star; upon touching the-artifact, the-second-death-star has a-vision of the-second-death-star as a-sith.
having tracked them, the-second-death-star destroys the-wayfinder and duels rey.
leia, dying, calls to the-second-death-star through the-force; rey impales the-second-death-star as the-second-death-star is distracted.
also sensing leia's-death, rey realizes what the-second-death-star did to the-second-death-star and regrets impaling the-second-death-star.
the-second-death-star uses the-force to heal the-second-death-star and confesses that the-second-death-star did want to join the-second-death-star as ben-solo before escaping aboard the-second-death-star tie fighter.
disturbed by her-sith-lineage, rey exiles herself on ahch-to.
luke's-force-spirit encourages her to face palpatine and gives her-leia's-lightsaber and palpatine old-x-wing.
rey departs for exegol with the-wayfinder from ren's-ship.
meanwhile, ren resumes ren true identity as ben-solo.
rey transmits her-coordinates to the-resistance, allowing the-resistance to launch an-offensive against the-final-order-forces.
rey confronts palpatine, who demands  rey kill him in anger for him spirit to pass into  rey, making  rey "empress palpatine".
however, ben arrives and joins  rey.
her-"empress-palpatine" absorbs their-life-energy to restore her-"empress-palpatine" full-power and incapacitates ben.
her-"empress-palpatine" then attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened,  rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who restore her-strength.
palpatine attacks  palpatine with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing  palpatine and  palpatine.
ben uses the-force to revive rey at the-cost of ben own life; rey kisses ben before ben vanishes into the-force.
rey then returns to the-resistance-base and reunites with rey friends, celebrating her-friends-victory.
sometime later, rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries the-skywalker-lightsabers, having built the-skywalker-lightsabers own in a-golden-color.
a-passerby asks rey a-passerby name; after seeing the-force-spirits of luke and leia, a-passerby responds, "rey skywalker".
related-works =====
the-novelization of the-rise of skywalker reveals that rey's-father was a-nonidentical-clone of palpatine.
an-upcoming-issue of the-comic-book-series star-wars-adventures will feature a-story set after the-events of the-film featuring rey, finn, and poe continuing to fight the-first-order.
television === ====
star-wars-rebels (2014) ====
rey makes a-brief-cameo as a-disembodied-voice in the-television-series star-wars-rebels, in the-episode "a-world between worlds".
in the-episode, set 16 years before rey-birth and 35 years before the-force awakens, the-young-padawan ezra-bridger briefly hears some of rey-lines from the-film (specifically rey speaking to the-unconscious-finn at the-end) in the-world between worlds, a-dimension that exists outside of time and space.
forces of destiny (2017) ====
rey stars in the-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny, voiced by daisy-ridley.
video-games ===
the-character of rey appears in the-video-games disney infinity 3.0, lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, and star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017),
all voiced by ridley, as well as in the-strategy-video-game
star-wars:
force-arena.
the-character of rey was also introduced as a-player-"skin" in the-game fortnite.
reception == ===
general ===
the-character and ridley's-portrayal have received critical-acclaim.
joe-morgenstern of the-wall-street-journal proclaimed that rey is "a-woman-warrior with the-stylish-ferocity of a-kung-fu-star," praising "the-verve [ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a-young-actress coming up in england," and stating, "it's hard to imagine what the-movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if rey is "a-woman-warrior with the-stylish-ferocity of a-kung-fu-star," praising "the-verve [ridley]'d cast the-wrong-person, but here ridley is in all ridley unassuming glory, and all's right with the-galaxy."
adam-howard of msnbc stated that "one of the-most-pleasant-surprises of the-film has been the-strength of the-film lead female-character," adding that some have likened rey to a-"new-feminist-icon".
relatedly, emily-rome of hitfix argued that rey is "everything we wanted in a-star-wars-female-character," praising ridley for being a-character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving."
in a-personal-essay, nicole-sperling of entertainment-weekly wrote about nicole-sperling of entertainment-weekly daughters feeling empowered after viewing the-film, stating, "they never commented on how pretty rey is.
they never had to flinch because rey was a-sexual-object to some-man in power.
they just felt strong.
megan-garber of the-atlantic wrote that rey "proves megan-garber of the-atlantic to be, in extremely-short-order, extremely adept as a-fighter".
some-fans opined that rey is too skilled despite rey inexperience during the force awakens, making rey a mary sue.
rome wrote that "the-speed with which rey mastered jedi-mind-tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero-training is the-stuff of fan-fiction.
rey is geek-feminist-wish-fulfillment."
tasha-robinson of the-verge said that rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
tasha-robinson of the-verge wrote "rey is kind of a-mary-sue-character" and that "a-mary-sue-character's a-fantasy-wish-fulfillment-character with outsized-skills, an-inhuman-reaction-time, and a-clever-answer to every-question—but so are the-other-major-star-wars-heroes."
other-outlets, including ridley herself, have argued that the-term mary-sue carries an-inherent-gender-bias, and that the-male-characters from the-original-trilogy did not face comparable-criticism.
j.-j.-abrams stated that "the-people who are getting freaked out are the-people who are accustomed to [male]-privilege, and this is not oppression, this is about fairness."
j.-j.-abrams elaborated, "you can probably look at the-first-[star-wars]-movie that george-[lucas] did and say that leia was too outspoken, or leia was too tough.
anyone who wants to find a-problem with anything can find a-problem with anything.
the-internet seems to be made for that."
adrienne-tyler of screen-rant argued rey's-abilities are explained in the-rise of skywalker as resulting from the-pair forming a-dyad in the-force, sharing the-same-fighting-capabilities.
rey's-unique-hairstyle attracted attention before and after the-force-awakens was released, being compared to leia's-hairdo from the-original-film, with debate over whether it would become as popular.
rey has also been compared to the-titular-character from the-hayao-miyazaki-anime-film-nausicaä of the-valley of the-wind (1984).richard-roeper described ridley's-portrayal of  rey as "a-breakout-performance", continuing by calling the-character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
ridley was nominated for a-2016-saturn-award for best-actress for ridley portrayal.
the-first-reel-women in technology-award for a-fictional-character was awarded to the-character ".
some-fans criticized  rey's-trilogy-wide-character-arc as insufficient.
fan-fiction-author-ricca said that tension that was built in the-first-two-films never gets resolved in the-last-film.
fan-fiction-author ricca wanted a-moment at the-end of the-rise of skywalker in which rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to  fan-fiction-author ricca.
some-critics and fans have noted a-visual-resemblance between rey's-character-design to that of bastila-shan from the-video-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, and that star-wars: knights of the-old-republic character arc shares thematic similarities with that of bastila's.
parentage ===
the-question of rey's-parentage was a-significant-point of discussion for the-series, and spawned numerous-fan-theories.
the-most-popular-theories were that rey's-parentage is the-daughter of luke-skywalker or han-solo, or is obi-wan-kenobi's-granddaughter (because of a-scene where rey hears kenobi's-echoed-voice following a-vision in the force awakens).
the-view that rey's-parentage is luke's-daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their-story-arc-similarities, star-wars being a-luke-skywalker-saga, rey having a-strong-attachment to luke's-lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the-force without any-training.
some fan theories about rey's-parentage pointed to "rey's-theme" featured in john-williams'-score of the force awakens, as the-theme shared similarities with the-themes for darth-vader and luke.
abrams stated that  abrams intentionally withheld rey's-last-name and background in the force awakens.
abrams said that  abrams felt that the-origin of kylo-ren was the-only-thing that could be revealed in kylo-ren film and that kylo-ren knew "quite a bit" about rey's-origin but would give courtesy to the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson by not saying any more.
former-star-wars:
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow stated that the-answer of rey's-origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that rey is "important in this-universe, not just in the-context of the force awakens, but in the-entire-galaxy.
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow deserves it."
ridley said that  ridley knew who rey's-parents were.
in the-last-jedi, rey is coaxed by kylo-ren into admitting that kylo-ren were "nobodies".
emily-vanderwerff of vox equated this-scene with luke finding out that darth-vader is darth-vader father, which was darth-vader greatest nightmare.
to emily-vanderwerff of vox, "rey's-greatest-nightmare is being no-one."
emily-vanderwerff of vox added that while kylo-ren "has every-reason to be lying" about this, to emily-vanderwerff of vox mind
it is a-good-thing that "rey is the-child of nobody of particular-importance to the-story so far."
josh-spiegel of the-hollywood-reporter stated that although some-fans might be disappointed by ren's-revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the-film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the-force and also not a skywalker" because "the-spirit of the-jedi extends ... to anyone with a-gift and the-power to believe.
conversely, casey-cipriani of bustle opined that while ren might be right about rey's-parents, ren is unreliable and "we have to take what ren says with a-grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the-story] for hints of rey's-lineage.
before the-release of the-rise of skywalker, abrams said that "there's more to the-story than you've seen," though, according to ridley, the-facts presented in the-jedi would not change.
rey being revealed as a-palpatine in the-rise of skywalker received a-mixed-reception.
joanna-robinson of vanity-fair interprets the-twist as a-rebuttal to the-themes presented in episode-viii, calling it "a blow to those-fans who eagerly devoured [rian]-johnson’s-message that anyone from anywhere can be a-force-wielding-hero."
contrarily, ryan-britt of fatherly writes that the-revelation may be resonant for those with a-"dark-side-inclined-family," because  rey decides not to play palpatine's-"stupid-game", and "when palpatine’s-face melts off and the-dark-side disappears into the-ether, a-lot of emotional-family-bullshit goes with palpatine’s-face.
inverse similarly argues that the-end of the-film sees  rey reject "any-power  rey grandfather held over  rey" and "bury the-past", in a-completion of the-hero's-journey.
following the-film's-release, daisy-ridley revealed that the-identity of rey's-parents had been in constant-flux over the-course of the-production of the-sequel-trilogy.
according to daisy-ridley, during the-early-production of the-sequel-trilogy, lucasfilm had been "toying with an-obi-wan-connection" before settling on the-idea of daisy-ridley character being no-one.
j.j.-abrams then pitched the-idea of emperor-palpatine being rey's-grandfather to daisy-ridley at the-start of production on episode-ix, although this-aspect of her-character "kept changing" over the-course of filming.
james-hunt of screen-rant argues that the-idea of an-obi-wan-connection "would've been an-equally-bad-decision," because it would still mean her-character "is powerful because of her-lineage, rather than rey simply being powerful because the-force chose her.
it continues the-focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting rey be wholly new."
relationships == ===
mentorship-tree === ==
references ==
footnotes-citations-sources ==
further-reading ==
hawkes, rebecca (december 23, 2015).
who is rey?
everything we know about daisy-ridley's-mysterious-new-star-wars-heroine".
the-daily-telegraph.
retrieved december 29, 2015.
oswald, anjelica (october 22, 2015).
meet daisy-ridley, the 23-year-old who snagged a-lead-role in 'star-wars:
the force awakens' – her-hollywood-career is about to blow up".
business-insider.
retrieved december 19, 2015.
external-links ==
rey in the starwars.com databank rey on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars is an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise, centered on a-film-series created by george-lucas that includes star-wars (1977), the-empire strikes back (1980), and return of the-jedi (1983).
a-film-series created by george-lucas that includes star-wars (1977) depicts the-adventures of various-characters "a long time ago in a-galaxy far, far away".
many-derivative-star-wars-works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the-original-trilogy of films, and later-installments.
this-body of work was collectively known as the-star-wars expanded universe for decades.
in october 2012, the-walt-disney-company acquired lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.
in april 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-expanded-universe-material as star-wars-legends and declared lucasfilm non-canon to the-franchise.
the-walt-disney-company's-focus would be shifted towards a-restructured-star-wars-canon based on new-material.
the-first-new-canon-adult-novel was star-wars:
a-new-dawn by john-jackson-miller, published in september 2014.this is a-list of original-novels, novel-adaptations, original-junior-novels, junior novel-adaptations, young-readers, and short-stories in the-star-wars-franchise.
a-list of original-novels, novel-adaptations, original-junior-novels, junior novel-adaptations, young-readers, and short-stories in the-star-wars-franchise does not include journals, graphic-novels or comic-books, which can be found in the-list of star wars comic-books.
reference-books and roleplaying-gamebooks can be found at the-list of star-wars-reference-books.
film-and-television-adaptations ==
the-novelizations offer an-alternate-take on the-events of the-movies.
many include discarded-or-slightly-altered-plot-lines.
it should be remembered that those published before 25-april 2014 are considered legends like all-other-media.
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999), by terry-brooks (32-bby)
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (junior-novel) (1999), by patricia-wrede (32-bby) (y)
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), by r.a.-salvatore (22-bby)
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (junior-novelization) (2002), by patricia-wrede (22-bby) (y)
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008), by karen-traviss (21.5-bby)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005), by matthew-stover (19-bby)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (junior-novel) (2005), by patricia-wrede (19-bby) (y)
star-wars:
from the-adventures of luke-skywalker/star-wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1976), by alan-dean-foster as george-lucas (0 bby-0-aby)
star-wars:
episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980), by donald-f.-glut (3-aby)
star-wars:
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), by james-kahn (4-aby)
star-wars:
return of the-jedi –
the-illustrated-edition (1983), by james-kahn (4-aby) ===
william-shakespeare's-star-wars ===
william-shakespeare's-the-phantom of menace:
star-wars-part the first (2015), by ian-doescher (32-bby)
william-shakespeare's-the-clone-army-attacketh:
star-wars-part the second (2015), by ian-doescher (22-bby)
william-shakespeare's-tragedy of the-sith's-revenge:
star-wars-part the third (2015), by ian-doescher (19-bby)
william-shakespeare's-star-wars (verily, a-new-hope) (2013), by ian-doescher (0 bby–0-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-empire-striketh back (2014), by ian-doescher (3-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-jedi doth return (2014), by ian-doescher (4-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-force doth awaken (2017), by ian-doescher (34-aby)
william-shakespeare's-jedi the last (2018), by ian-doescher (34-aby)
william-shakespeare's-the-merry-rise of skywalker (2020) by ian-doescher (35-aby) ==
original-canon-stories (2014–present) ==
since 2014, the-official-star-wars-canon includes all of the-movie-episodes, the-clone-wars-film and the-television shows star-wars:
the-clone-wars, star-wars-rebels, and star-wars-resistance, as well as any-books, comics, and video-games published after april 2014.
short-stories === ====
star-wars-insider (2014–present) ====
since 2014, various-short-stories have been published in star-wars-insider.
the-rise of the-empire (october 2015) ==== "mercy-mission" by melissa-scott (14-bby)
"bottleneck" by john-jackson-miller (12-bby) "
the-levers of power" by jason-fry (4-aby) ====
"the-perfect-weapon" ====
"the-perfect-weapon" (november 2015) by delilah-s.-dawson (34-aby).
this-story is part of the-journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens promotional-campaign.
printed in the-paperback-edition of the-star-wars:
the-force awakens novelization.
tales from a-galaxy
far, far away: aliens ====
the-collection-tales from a-galaxy
far, far away: aliens is part of the-journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens promotional-campaign.
some-stories were originally published as individual-e-books, and later collected with other-new-stories.
however,  some-stories were all published together as a-book called star wars: tales from a-galaxy
far, far away "all creatures
great-and-small"-(november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby) "
high-noon on jakku" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby) "
the-crimson-corsair and the-lost-treasure of count-dooku" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (31-aby;
flashbacks to 19-bby) "
the-face of evil" (november 2015) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby) "
a-recipe for death" (april 2016) by landry-q.-walker (pre–32-bby)
"true-love" (april 2016) by landry-q.-walker (34-aby)
from a-certain-point of view (october 2017) ==== ====
canto-bight (december 2017) ====
"rules of the-game", by saladin-ahmed (34-aby)
"hear nothing, see nothing, say nothing", by rae-carson (34-aby) "
the-wine in dreams", by mira-grant (34-aby) "the-ride", by john-jackson-miller (34-aby) ===
children's-books ===
canon-storybooks for younger-readers that are shorter than a-standard-novel-or-young-adult-novel.
original-star-wars-legends-stories ==
this-body of work represents the-original-star-wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
beginning with the-1999-release of star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, lucasfilm has divided lucasfilm titles by fictional-"era" with symbols designating such.
before the-republic-era ===
this-era contains stories taking place more-than-25,000-years before star wars episode iv
:-a-new-hope.
old-galactic-republic-era ===
old-galactic-republic-era === contains stories taking place 25,000-to-1,000-years before star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope.
rise of the-empire-era ===
this-era contains stories taking place within 100-years before star wars episode iv: a-new-hope.
episode-ii: attack of the-clones ==== ====
the-clone-wars ====
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008), by karen-traviss (21.5-bby) (y)
the-clone-wars: wild-space (2008), by karen-miller (21.5-bby)
the-clone-wars: no-prisoners (2009), by karen-traviss (21-bby)
clone-wars: gambit by karen-miller (21-bby) ===
stealth (2010)
(a)-siege (2010)
clone-wars:
secret-missions by ryder-windham (21-bby) ====
breakout-squad (2009)
(y)-curse of the-black-hole-pirates (2010)
(y)-duel at shattered-rock (2011)
guardians of the-chiss-key (2012)
republic-commando ====
republic-commando:
hard-contact (2004), by karen-traviss (22-bby)
"omega-squad: targets" (2005), by karen-traviss (21-bby) in star wars insider #81 and republic-commando:
triple-zero-republic-commando:
triple zero (2006), by karen-traviss (21-bby)
"republic-commando:-odds" (2006), by karen-traviss (21-bby) in star wars insider #87 and republic-commando: true colors republic-commando:
true-colors (2007), by karen-traviss (21-bby)
republic-commando:
order 66 (2008), by karen-traviss (19-bby)
imperial-commando =====
imperial-commando: 501st (2009), by karen-traviss (19-bby) ====
clone-wars ====
shatterpoint (2003), by matthew-stover (21.5-bby)
the-cestus-deception (2004), by steven-barnes (21.5-bby)
the-hive (2004), by steven-barnes (21.5-bby) (e)
(a)-jedi-trial (2004), by david-sherman & dan-cragg (21.5-bby)
(a)-yoda: dark-rendezvous (2004), by sean-stewart (20 bby
i: battle-surgeons (2004), by michael-reaves & steve-perry (20-bby)
(a)-medstar-ii:
jedi-healer (2004), by michael-reaves & steve-perry (20-bby)
(a)-labyrinth of evil (2005), by james-luceno (19-bby)
episode iii: revenge of the-sith ====
dark-lord:
the-rise of darth-vader (2005), by james-luceno (19-bby)
(a)-kenobi (2013), by john-jackson-miller (19-bby)
"incognito" (2013), by john-jackson-miller (19-bby) in star wars insider #143 and kenobi-(a) ====
coruscant-nights (18.8 – 17-bby) ====
jedi-twilight (2008), by michael-reaves (18.8-bby)
street of shadows (2008), by michael-reaves (19 bby–18.46 bby)
patterns of force (2009), by michael-reaves with maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff (uncredited) (18.3-bby)
the-last-jedi (2013), by michael-reaves-&-maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff-(18–17-bby) ====
the last of the-last-jedi by jude-watson (18-bby) ====
the-desperate-mission (2005)
(y)-dark-warning (2005)
(y)-underworld (2005)
death on naboo (2006)
a-tangled-web (2006)
(y)-return of the-dark-side (2006)
(y)-secret-weapon (2007) (y) against the-empire (2007) (y)
master of deception (2008)
(y)-reckoning (2008)
a-new-hope:
the-life of luke-skywalker (15-bby – 4-aby) ====
a-new-hope:
the-life of luke-skywalker (2009), by ryder-windham-(y) ====
the han solo trilogy ====
the-paradise-snare (1997), by a.c.-crispin (10-bby)
the-hutt-gambit (1997), by a.c.-crispin (5-4-bby)
rebel-dawn (1998), by a.c.-crispin (3-0-bby)
the-adventures of lando-calrissian ====
lando-calrissian and the-mindharp of sharu (1983), by l.-neil-smith (4-bby)
lando-calrissian and the-flamewind of oseon (1983), by l.-neil-smith (4-bby)
lando-calrissian and the-starcave of thonboka (1983), by l.-neil-smith (3-bby) ====
the force unleashed (3-–-1-bby) ====
the-force unleashed (2008), by sean-williams (3-2-bby)
the-force unleashed ii
(2010), by sean-williams (1-bby) (a) ====
the-han-solo-adventures (2-bby) ====
han-solo at stars'-end (1979), by brian-daley han-solo's revenge (1979), by brian-daley han-solo and the-lost-legacy (1980), by brian-daley ====
death-troopers ====
death-troopers (2009), by joe-schreiber (1-bby)
rebellion-era ==
this-era contains stories taking place within five-years after the-events of star wars episode iv: a-new-hope.
death-star ====
death-star (2007), by michael-reaves & steve-perry (1-bby – 0-bby)
shadow-games ====
shadow-games (2011), by michael-reaves and maya-kaathryn-bohnhoff (1-bby – 0-bby) ====
episode iv:
a-new-hope ==== ====
rebel-force by alex-wheeler (0-–-1-aby) ==== 0 aby
target (2008)
(y)-hostage (2008)
(y)-renegade (2009)
(y) 0.5-aby-firefight (2009)
(y) trapped (2010)
(y)-uprising (2010) (1-aby) (y) ====
scoundrels ====
winner lose all
—a-lando-calrissian-tale (2012), by timothy-zahn (1-0-bby)
(e)-scoundrels (2013), by timothy-zahn (0-aby)
galaxy of fear by john-whitman (0.5-aby) (y) === =
eaten alive (1997)
city of the dead (1997)
planet-plague (1997)
the-nightmare-machine (1997)
ghost of the-jedi (1997)
army of terror (1997)
the-brain-spiders (1997)
the-swarm (1998)
spore (1998)
the-doomsday-ship (1998)
clones (1998)
the-hunger (1998)
hand of judgment (0.5 – 0.8-aby) ====
allegiance (2007), by timothy-zahn (0.5-aby) (a)-choices of one (2011), by timothy-zahn (0.8-aby) ====
smuggler's-gambit (0-–-3-aby) ====
smuggler's-gambit (2012), by kyle-newman,
f.j.-desanto (a) ====
star-wars-galaxies ====
star-wars-galaxies:
the-ruins of dantooine (2003), by voronica-whitney-robinson & haden-blackman (1-aby) (y) ====
splinter of the-mind's-eye ====
splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978), by alan-dean-foster (2-aby)
empire and rebellion (2 –-3-aby)
razor's-edge (2013), by martha-wells (2-aby) honor among thieves (2014), by james-s.-a.-corey (2–3-aby)
the-further-adventures ====
24-page-read-along-book with color-illustrations accompanied by a-7-inch-33-1/3-record or cassette.
droid-world (1983), by archie-goodwin (adapter) and dick-foes (illustrator) (3-aby)
(y)-planet of the-hoojibs (1983), by david-michelinie (adapter) and greg-winters (illustrator) (3-aby) (y)
rebel-mission to ord-mantell ====
vinyl-record-only,-no-book.
rebel-mission to ord-mantell (1983), by brian-daley (3-aby) (y) ====
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
shadows of empire ====
shadows of empire (1996), by steve-perry (3.5-aby)
episode-vi:
return of the-jedi ====
24-page-read-along-book with color-illustrations accompanied by a-7-inch-33-1/3-record or cassette.
the-ewoks join the-fight (1983), by bonnie-bogart (adapter) & diane-de-groat (illustrator) (4-aby) (y) ====
golden-books ====
24-page-illustrated-children's-books by golden-books-journey to mos-eisley (1998), by jay-rudko (0-bby) (y)
the-hoth-adventure (1998), by jay-rudko (3-aby)
(y)-escape from jabba's-palace (1998), by jay-rudko (4-aby)
(y)in 2015, the-original-six-star-wars-films were adapted as little-golden-books.
in 2017, a-new-hope was also released as a-big-golden-book.
additionally,-solo:
a-star-wars-story and the-sequel-trilogy were adapted.
many-other-original-titles featuring scenes from throughout the-saga have been released, including i am a-padawan by ashley-eckstein.
an-upcoming-release will adapt the-mandalorian.
the-bounty-hunter-wars ====
the-mandalorian-armor (1998), by k.w.-jeter (0–4 aby)
(a)-slave-ship (1998), by k.w.-jeter
(0–4-aby)-(a)
hard-merchandise (1999), by k.w.-jeter (0–4 aby)
the-truce at bakura ====
the-truce at bakura ====
new-republic-era ===
new-republic-era ==
= takes place from five-to-25-years after star wars episode iv
:-a-new-hope.
dark-forces by william-c.-dietz (0-–-5-aby) ====
soldier for the-empire (1997) (0-aby) (y)
(a)-5-aby-rebel-agent (1998)
(a)-jedi-knight (1998)
jedi-prince by paul & hollace-davids (5-aby) ====
the-glove of darth-vader (1992) (y)
the-lost-city of the-jedi (1992)
zorba the-hutt's-revenge (1992)
(y)-mission from mount-yoda (1993) (y)-queen of the-empire (1993)
prophets of the-dark-side (1993) (y)
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor ====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor (2008), by matthew-stover (5.5-aby)
x-wing ====
rogue-squadron (1996), by michael-stackpole (6.5-aby)
(a)-wedge's-gamble (1996), by michael-stackpole (6.5-aby)
the-krytos-trap (1996), by michael-stackpole (7-aby)
the-bacta-war (1997), by michael-stackpole (7-aby)
(a) wraith-squadron (1998), by aaron-allston (7-aby)
(a)-iron-fist (1998), by aaron-allston (7.5-aby)
solo-command (1999), by aaron-allston (7.5-aby)
isard's-revenge (1999), by michael-stackpole (9-aby) (a)-starfighters of adumar (1999), by aaron-allston (12–13-aby)
the-courtship of princess-leia ====
the-courtship of princess-leia ====
a forest apart ====
apart (2003), by troy-denning (8-aby) (e) ====
tatooine-ghost ====
tatooine-ghost (2003), by troy-denning (8-aby)
(a) ==== mixed up droid ====
mixed up droid (1995), by ryder-windham (8-aby) (a) ====
the-thrawn-trilogy ====
heir to the-empire (1991), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
(a)-dark-force rising (1992), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
the-last-command (1993), by timothy-zahn (9-aby)
the-dark-empire trilogy ====
dark-empire (1991–1992), by tom-veitch (10-aby)
dark-empire-ii (1994–1995), by tom-veitch (10-aby)
(a)-empire's-end (1995), by tom-veitch (11-aby) (a) ====
crimson-empire ====
crimson-empire (1997), by mike-richardson, randy-stradley (11-aby)
the-jedi-academy trilogy ====
jedi-search (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
(a)-dark-apprentice (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
(a)-champions of the-force (1994), by kevin-j.-anderson (11-aby)
i, jedi ====
i, jedi (1998), by michael-stackpole (11-aby) (a) ====
the-callista-trilogy ====
children of the-jedi (1995), by barbara-hambly (12–13-aby)
(a)-darksaber (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson (12–13-aby)
(a)-planet of twilight (1997), by barbara-hambly (12–13-aby)
the-crystal-star ====
the-crystal-star (1994), by vonda-mcintyre (14-aby) (a) ====
the-black-fleet-crisis-trilogy ====
before the-storm (1996), by michael-p.-kube-mcdowell (16-aby)
(a)-shield of lies (1997), by michael-p.-kube-mcdowell (16-aby)
tyrant's-test (1998), by michael-p.-kube-mcdowell (16-aby)
the-new-rebellion ====
the-new-rebellion (1996), by kristine-kathryn-rusch (17-aby)
the corellian trilogy ====
star-wars-legends:
ambush at corellia (1995), by roger-macbride-allen (18-aby)
(a)-assault at selonia (1995), by roger-macbride-allen (18-aby)
(a)-showdown at centerpoint (1995), by roger-macbride-allen (18-aby)
the-hand of thrawn ====
specter of the past (1997), by timothy-zahn (19-aby)
(a)-vision of the-future (1998), by timothy-zahn (19-aby)
scourge ====
scourge (2012), by jeff-grubb (19-aby) (a) ====
survivor's-quest ====
fool's-bargain (2004), by timothy-zahn (22-aby)
(e)-survivor's-quest (2004), by timothy-zahn (22-aby)
junior-jedi-knights ====
the-golden-globe (1995), by nancy-richardson (22-aby)
(y)-lyric's-world (1996), by nancy-richardson (22-aby)
(y)-promises (1996), by nancy-richardson (22-aby)
(y)-anakin's-quest (1996), by rebecca-moesta (22-aby) (y)
vader's-fortress (1997), by rebecca-moesta (22-aby)
(y)-kenobi's-blade (1997), by rebecca-moesta (22-aby) (y) ====
young-jedi-knights ====
heirs of the-force (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-shadow-academy (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
the-lost-ones (1995), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
lightsabers (1996), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-darkest-knight (1996), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-jedi under siege (1996), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-shards of alderaan (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-diversity-alliance (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
delusions of grandeur (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-jedi-bounty (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
the-emperor's-plague (1997), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y) return to ord-mantell (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-trouble on cloud-city (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
crisis at crystal-reef (1998), by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
(y)-jedi-shadow (omnibus – heirs of the-force, shadow-academy & the-lost-ones) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
jedi-sunrise (omnibus – lightsabers, darkest-knight, & jedi under siege) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby)
under the-black-sun (omnibus – return to ord-mantell, trouble on cloud-city, & crisis at crystal-reef) by kevin-j.-anderson & rebecca-moesta (23–24-aby) (y) ==
new-jedi-order-era ===
this-era takes place within 25-to-39-years after star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope.
a-practical-man ====
boba-fett:
a-practical-man (2006), by karen-traviss (25-aby) (e) ====
the-new-jedi-order ====
vector-prime (1999), by r.a.-salvatore (25-aby)
(a)-dark-tide
i: onslaught (2000), by michael-stackpole (25-aby)
(a)-dark-tide-ii:
ruin (2000), by michael-stackpole (25-aby)
agents of chaos
i: hero's-trial (2000), by james-luceno (25-aby) (a)-agents of chaos ii:
jedi-eclipse (2000), by james-luceno (25-aby)
balance-point (2000), by kathy-tyers (26-aby) (a) recovery (2001), by troy-denning (26-aby) (e)-edge of victory
i: conquest (2001), by greg-keyes (26-aby)
(a)-edge of victory ii:
rebirth (2001), by greg-keyes (27-aby)
(a)-"emissary of the-void" (2002), by greg-keyes (26–27-aby), serialized-epic published in star-wars-gamer,-issues 8–10, and star-wars-insider,-issues
star by star (2001), by troy-denning (27-aby)
(a)-dark-journey (2002), by elaine-cunningham (27-aby)
enemy-lines
i: rebel-dream (2002), by aaron-allston (27-aby) (a)
enemy-lines-ii:
rebel-stand (2002), by aaron-allston (27 aby)(a)
traitor (2002), by matthew-stover (27-aby)
(a)-destiny's-way (2002), by walter-jon-williams (28-aby)
ylesia (2002), by walter-jon-williams (28-aby)
force-heretic
i: remnant (2003), by sean-williams & shane-dix (28-aby)
(a)-force-heretic-ii:
refugee (2003), by sean-williams & shane-dix (28-aby)
(a)-force-heretic-iii: reunion (2003), by sean-williams & shane-dix (28–29 aby)
the-final-prophecy (2003), by greg-keyes (29-aby)
the-unifying-force (2003), by james-luceno (29-aby) (a) ====
the-dark-nest-trilogy ====
the-joiner-king (2005), by troy-denning (35-aby) (a)
the-unseen-queen (2005), by troy-denning (36-aby) (a)
the-swarm-war (2005), by troy-denning (36-aby) (a) ===
legacy-era ===
legacy-era ==
= takes place
+-years-after-star-wars-episode-iv:-a-new-hope.
legacy of the-force ===
betrayal (2006), by aaron-allston (40-aby) (a
) bloodlines (2006), by karen-traviss (40-aby)
(a)-tempest (2006), by troy-denning (40-aby)
(a)-exile (2007), by aaron-allston (40-aby)
(a)-sacrifice (2007), by karen-traviss (40-aby) (a)-inferno (2007), by troy-denning (40-aby)
(a)-fury (2007), by aaron-allston (40-aby)
(a)-revelation (2008), by karen-traviss (40-aby)
(a) invincible (2008), by troy-denning (41-aby)
crosscurrent ====
crosscurrent (2010), by paul-s.-kemp (41-aby)
riptide (2011), by paul-s.-kemp (41-aby)
millennium-falcon ====
millennium-falcon (2008), by james-luceno (60-bby, 19-bby, 10-bby, 5-bby, 43-aby)
fate of the-jedi ====
outcast (2009), by aaron-allston (43.5-aby)
(a)-omen (2009), by christie-golden (43.5-aby) (a)
abyss (2009), by troy-denning (43.5-aby) (a
) backlash (2010), by aaron-allston (44-aby) (a
) allies (2010), by christie-golden (44-aby)
vortex (2010), by troy-denning (44-aby)
(a)-conviction (2011), by aaron-allston (44.5-aby) (a)-ascension (2011), by christie-golden (44.5-aby) (a) apocalypse (2012), by troy-denning (44.5-aby) (a)
crucible ====
crucible (2013) by troy-denning (45-aby) (a) ===
short-story-anthologies ===
these-books contain short-star-wars-stories from several-notable-science-fiction-authors with stories that span different-timelines.
tales from the-mos-eisley-cantina (1995), edited by kevin-j.-anderson (0–3-aby)
(e)-tales from jabba's-palace (1995), edited by kevin-j.-anderson (4-aby)
tales of the-bounty-hunters (1996), edited by kevin-j.-anderson (3-aby)
tales from the-empire (1997), edited by peter-schweighofer (various) (4-aby)
tales from the-new-republic (1999), edited by peter-schweighofer and craig-carey (various) (4-aby)
star-wars:
science-adventures (1999) were authored by jude-watson and k.d.-burkett.
references ==
planet of the-apes is an-american-science-fiction-media-franchise consisting of films, books, television-series, comics, and other-media about a-world in which humans and intelligent-apes clash for control.
an-american-science-fiction-media-franchise consisting of films, books, television-series, comics, and other-media about a-world in which humans and intelligent-apes clash for control is based on french-author-pierre-boulle's-1963-novel-la-planète-des-singes, translated into english as planet of the-apes or monkey planet.
an-american-science-fiction-media-franchise consisting of films, books, television-series, comics, and other-media about a-world in which humans and intelligent-apes clash for control-1968-film-adaptation, planet of the-apes, was a-critical-and-commercial-hit, initiating a-series of sequels, tie-ins, and derivative-works.
arthur-p.-jacobs produced the-first-five-apes-films through apjac-productions for distributor-20th-century-fox; since  arthur-p.-jacobs death in 1973,  arthur-p.-jacobs has controlled the-franchise.
four-sequels followed the-original-film from 1970 to 1973:
beneath the-planet of the-apes, escape from the-planet of the-apes, conquest of the-planet of the-apes and battle for the-planet of the-apesthe-apes.
four-sequels did not approach the-critical-acclaim of the original but were commercially successful, spawning two-television-series in 1974 and 1975.
plans for a-film-remake stalled in "development-hell" for over-ten-years before tim-burton's-planet of the-apes was released in 2001.
a-reboot-film-series commenced in 2011 with rise of the-planet of the-apes, which was followed by dawn of the-planet of the-apes in 2014 and war for the-planet of the-apes in 2017.
the-films have grossed a-total of over us$2 billion worldwide, against a-combined-budget of $567.5 million.
along with further-narratives in various-media, franchise-tie-ins include video-games and toys.
planet of the-apes has received particular-attention among film-critics for planet of the-apes treatment of racial-issues.
cinema-and-cultural-analysts have also explored cinema-and-cultural-cold-war-and-animal-rights-themes.
the-series has influenced subsequent-films, media, and art, as well as popular-culture and political-discourse.
la-planète-des-singes ==
the-series began with french-author-pierre-boulle's-1963-novel-la-planète-des-singes.
french-author-pierre-boulle's-1963-novel-la-planète-des-singes wrote french-author-pierre-boulle's-1963-novel-la-planète-des-singes in six-months after the-"humanlike-expressions" of gorillas at the-zoo inspired french-author-pierre-boulle's-1963-novel-la-planète-des-singes to contemplate the-relationship between man and ape.
la-planète-des-singes was heavily influenced by 18th--and-19th-century-fantastical-travel-narratives, especially-jonathan-swift's-satirical-gulliver's-travels.
la-planète-des-singes is one of several of boulle's-works to use science-fiction-tropes and plot-devices to comment on the-failings of human-nature and mankind's-overreliance on technology, though boulle rejected the-science-fiction-label, instead terming his-genre "social-fantasy".
the-novel is a-satire that follows french-journalist-ulysse-mérou, who participates in a-voyage to a-distant-planet where speechless, animalistic-humans are hunted and enslaved by an-advanced-society of apes.
the-ape-species are sorted into classes: the-gorillas are police-officers, the-chimpanzees are scientists, and the-orangutans are politicians.
eventually, mérou discovers that humans once dominated the-planet until humans-complacency allowed the-more-industrious-apes to overthrow humans.
the-story's-central-message is that human-intelligence is not a-fixed-quality and could atrophy if taken for granted.
boulle considered the novel one of boulle minor works, though boulle proved to be a-bestseller.
british-author-xan-fielding translated boulle into english; boulle was published in the-united-kingdom as monkey-planet and in the-united-states as planet of the-apes.
original-film-series ==
boulle's-literary-agent, allain-bernheim, brought the-novel to the-attention of american-film-producer-arthur-p.-jacobs, who had come to paris looking for properties to adapt with his-new-company, apjac-productions.
to explain his-interests, jacobs would tell agents, "i wish king-kong hadn't been made so
i could make it."
bernheim initially approached jacobs about a-françoise-sagan-novel, which jacobs turned down.
remembering jacobs earlier-comment about king-kong, bernheim mentioned la-planète-des-singes, not expecting jacobs would be interested.
however, the-story intrigued jacobs, who bought the-film-rights immediately.
planet of the-apes (1968) ===
after optioning the-novel's-film-rights, jacobs spent over-three-years trying to convince filmmakers to take on the-project.
jacobs engaged a-succession of artists to create test-sketches and hired veteran-television-writer-rod-serling, creator of the-twilight-zone, to pen the-screenplay.
serling's-script changed elements of boulle's-novel, introducing cold-war-themes; notably,  serling's-script devised a-new-twist-ending that revealed the-planet to be a-future-earth where humans had destroyed humans through nuclear-warfare.
production-costs were estimated at over $10 million, a-risk
no-studio in either-hollywood or europe would assume.
jacobs and associate-producer-mort-abrahams persevered and eventually persuaded charlton-heston to star; charlton-heston in turn recommended director-franklin-j.-schaffner.
the-team recorded a-brief-screen-test featuring heston, which ultimately convinced 20th-century-fox the-film could succeed.
fox insisted on changes to reduce the-budget to a more manageable $5.8 million.
the-producers hired veteran-writer-michael-wilson, who had previously adapted boulle's-novel the-bridge over the-river-kwai, to rewrite serling's-script.
to save on special-effects-costs, wilson's-script described an-ape-society more primitive than that which appeared in the-novel.
the-new-version changed much of the-plot and dialogue but retained the-cold-war-themes and serling's-ending.
john-chambers created the-makeup-effects.
heston played 20th-century-american-astronaut-george-taylor, who travels to a-strange-planet where intelligent-apes dominate mute,-primitive-humans.
kim-hunter and roddy-mcdowall played the-sympathetic-chimpanzees
zira and cornelius and linda-harrison portrayed taylor's-love-interest nova.
maurice-evans played the-villain, orangutan minister of science dr. zaius.
the-finale, in which taylor comes upon a-ruined-statue of liberty and realizes maurice-evans has been on earth all along, became the-series'-defining-scene and one of the-most-iconic-images in 1960s film.
planet of the-apes was released on february 8, 1968, and was a-smash-success with both-critics and audiences.
planet of the-apes was one of the-year's-10-biggest-money-makers in north-america, taking in an estimated $22 million (nearly four times  planet of the-apes budget) and earned rave-reviews.
john-chambers received an-honorary-oscar at the-41st-academy-awards for john-chambers make-up-effects, the first ever given to a-make-up-artist.
jerry-goldsmith's-score and morton-haack's-costume-design also earned oscar-nominations.
john-chambers approached jacobs and abrahams about filming a-sequel.
though   had not made the-film with sequels in mind, the-film success led   to consider the-prospect.
beneath the-planet of the-apes (1970) ===
planning for the-sequel, eventually titled beneath the-planet of the-apes, began two months after the-film's-release.
jacobs and abrahams considered several-treatments by serling and boulle, eventually rejecting jacobs and abrahams.
in late 1968, the-producers hired paul-dehn to write the-script; paul-dehn would become the-primary-writer for the-franchise.
charlton-heston was uninterested in a-sequel but agreed to shoot a-few-scenes if charlton-heston character was killed off and his-character-salary was donated to charity.
in one of many-major-rewrites, paul-dehn altered the-script to center on a-new-character, brent, played by james-franciscus.
with schaffner unavailable, owing to schaffner work on patton, the-producers hired ted-post as director on january 8, 1969.
ted-post struggled with the-material, especially after the-studio cut the-budget to $3.4 million.
the-story follows franciscus'-character, an-astronaut who, while searching for taylor, inadvertently follows him into the-future.
after encountering the-apes from the-first-film, brent finds taylor imprisoned by a-colony of subterranean-human-mutants who worship an-ancient-nuclear-bomb.
kim-hunter, maurice-evans and linda-harrison returned as zira, zaius and nova.
david-watson replaced roddy-mcdowall as cornelius, as mcdowall was unavailable due to a-scheduling-conflict.
james-gregory played gorilla-general-ursus and paul-richards played mutant-leader-méndez.
the-film opened on may 26, 1970.
unlike  the-film predecessor, beneath was poorly reviewed; critics typically regard  the-film as the worst of the-apes sequels other than the-last-one, battle for the-planet of the-apes.
nonetheless,  the-film was a-major-box-office hit, nearing the-original's-numbers.
despite a-conclusion depicting the-planet of the-apes's-nuclear-destruction, fox requested another-sequel, creating a-series.
escape from the-planet of the-apes (1971) ===
following the-financial-success of beneath, arthur-p.-jacobs recruited paul-dehn to write a-new-script with a-brief-telegram: "apes exist, sequel required. "
paul-dehn immediately started work on what became escape from the-planet of the-apes.
the-producers hired a-new-director, don-taylor.
fox gave the-production a-greatly-diminished-budget of $2.5 million, which required a-tight-production-schedule.
to work around a-greatly-diminished-budget of $2.5 million, which required a-tight-production-schedule, as well as beneath's seemingly-definitive-ending, the-film took the-series in a-new-direction by transporting zira (kim-hunter) and cornelius (roddy-mcdowall, returning to the-role after being absent from beneath) back in time to the-contemporary-united-states, reducing the-need for expensive-sets and ape-make-up-effects.
in the-film, zira and cornelius are initially accepted by american-society, but the-humans'-fears that zira and cornelius child will bring about the-domination of the-human-race by evolved-apes leads to conflict.
jacobs'-wife, natalie-trundy, who appeared as a-mutant in beneath and would play the-ape-lisa in the-next-two-sequels, was cast as dr.-stephanie-branton.
bradford-dillman played dr.-lewis-dixon, ricardo-montalbán played armando and eric-braeden portrayed the-villain, the-president's-science-advisor-otto-hasslein.
compared to its-predecessors, escape dwelt more heavily on themes of racial-conflict, which became a-primary-focus through the-rest of the-series.
the-film opened on may 21, 1971, less than a year after beneath.
the-film was well-received by critics.
from this-point critics began seeing the-films less as independent-units and more as installments in a-greater-work; cinefantastique-editor-frederick-s.-clarke wrote that the-burgeoning-series had "the-promise of being the-first-epic of filmed-science-fiction. "
it also performed well at the-box-office, though not as strongly as it predecessors.
fox ordered a-third-sequel.
conquest of the-planet of the-apes (1972) ===
based on the-strong-positive-response to escape, fox ordered conquest of the-planet of the-apes, though the-apes provided a-comparatively-low-budget of $1.7 million.
paul-dehn returned as the-scriptwriter, and producer-jacobs hired j.-lee-thompson to direct.
j.-lee-thompson had worked with producer-jacobs on two-earlier-films as well as during the-initial-stages of planet, but scheduling-conflicts had made j.-lee-thompson unavailable during  paul-dehn-long-development-process.
for conquest, j.-lee-thompson and dehn focused heavily on the-racial-conflict-theme, an-ancillary-concern in the-early-films that became a-central-focus in escape.
in particular,  paul-dehn associated the-apes with african-americans and modeled the-plot after the-1966-watts-riots and other-episodes from the-civil-rights-movement.
roddy-mcdowall signed on to play caesar, the-son of roddy-mcdowall previous character cornelius.
ricardo-montalban returned as armando, while don-murray played governor-breck, severn-darden played kolp and hari-rhodes played macdonald.
following escape, conquest is set in a-near-future where humans have turned apes into slaves; caesar rises from bondage to lead an-ape-rebellion.
the-film opened on june 30, 1972.
reviews were mixed, but the-ending left the-series open to another-sequel and conquest was successful enough at the-box-office that fox commissioned another-film.
battle for the-planet of the-apes (1973) ===
fox approved battle for the-planet of the-apes the-apes with a-$1.2-million-budget, the lowest of the-series.
the-filmmakers went into the-project knowing that the-project would be the-end of the-series.
j.-lee-thompson returned as director.
series-writer-paul-dehn submitted a-treatment, but illness forced series-writer-paul-dehn to leave the-film before completing the-script.
the-producers subsequently hired john-william-corrington and joyce-hooper-corrington to write the-screenplay.
battle continued conquest's-focus on racial-conflict and domination but, likely based in part on the-studio's-wishes, the-corringtons discarded dehn's-pessimistic-treatment in favor of a-story with a-more-hopeful,-though-ambiguous,-resolution.
battle follows caesar as caesar leads the-apes and their-human-subjects after a-devastating-war that destroyed much of the-planet.
caesar contends with both-an-attack by radiation-scarred-human-mutants and a-coup-attempt as caesar attempts to build a-better-society for both-apes and humans.
mcdowall returned as caesar and severn-darden returned as kolp.
paul-williams played the-orangutan
virgil, austin-stoker played macdonald (the-brother of hari-rhodes'-character) and claude-akins played the-evil-gorilla-general-aldo.
john-huston played the-orangutan-lawgiver in a-frame-narrative.
the-orangutan-lawgiver opened on may 2, 1973.
the-orangutan-lawgiver made a-profit over production-costs but received poor-reviews from critics, who regard the-orangutan-lawgiver as the weakest of the-five-films.
critics have offered various-interpretations of the-film's-message and the-film-significance for the-series.
particular-attention has been paid to the-ambiguous-imagery in the-ending: set over 700 years after the-main-events, the-last-scene depicts a-statue of caesar shedding a-single-tear as the-lawgiver recounts caesar's story to an-integrated-audience of ape-and-human-children.
by one-interpretation, a-statue of caesar cries tears of joy because the-species have broken the-cycle of oppression, giving the-series an-optimistic-finale.
by another, a-statue of caesar weeps because racial-strife still exists, implying the-dystopian-future of planet and beneath is unavoidable.
television-series == ===
planet of the-apes-tv-series ===
as-well-as-as-well-profitable-returns at the-box-office, as well earned very-high-ratings on television after as well theatrical-runs.
to capitalize on this-success, arthur-p.-jacobs conceived of an-hour-long-live-action-television-series to follow as well.
he first had the-idea in 1971 during the-production of conquest, which he then anticipated would be the-final-film, but he shelved the-project once he ordered a-fifth-installment.
jacobs died on june 27, 1973, bringing an-end to the-apjac-productions-era of the-planet of the-apes-franchise.
former-he-executive-stan-hough took over as producer for the-project, titled planet of the-apes.
cbs picked up the-series for cbs 1974 autumn lineup.
ron-harper and james-naughton played alan-virdon and peter-burke, two-20th-century-american-astronauts who pass through a-time-warp to a-future where apes subjugate humans (unlike the-original-film, the-humans can speak).
roddy-mcdowall returned to the-franchise as galen, a-chimpanzee who joins the-astronauts.
booth-coleman played orangutan-councillor-zaius and mark-lenard played gorilla-general-urko.
the-episodes portray virdon, burke, and galen as burke, and galen search for a-way-home, aid downtrodden-humans and apes and avoid the-authorities.
the-show premiered on september 13, 1974, filling cbs's-8–9-p.m.-time-slot on fridays.
the-show premiered on september 13, 1974, filling cbs's-8–9-p.m.-time-slot on fridays earned low-ratings during the-show premiered on september 13, 1974, filling cbs's-8–9-p.m.-time-slot on fridays run, a fact the-production-team attributed to repetitive-storytelling and too-little-screen-time for the-apes who made the-franchise famous.
given the-considerable-production-costs, cbs canceled the-show after 14-episodes, the-last-airing on december 20, 1974.in 1981, fox reedited ten of the-episodes into five-television-films.
each-film combined two-episodes and (in some-markets) added new-introductory-and-concluding-segments starring mcdowall as an-aged-galen.
five-television-films were given what scholar-eric-greene calls "the most outlandish titles of the-apes-corpus": back to the-planet of the-apes; forgotten-city of the-planet of the-apesthe-apes; treachery and greed on the-planet of the-apesthe-apes; life, liberty and pursuit on the-planet of the-apesthe-apes; and farewell to the-planet of the-apesthe-apes.
scholar-eric-greene finds the-show's-position in the-apes-timeline significant: set in 3085, it occurs about 900 years before taylor's-crash in each-film and 400 years after the-lawgiver's-sermon in battle.
by depicting a-future where apes dominate humans, it implies the-lawgiver's-message of equality between man and ape has failed, giving weight to the-more-pessimistic-interpretation of battle's-ending.
greene argues that the-show emphasized the-theme of racial-conflict less than the-films had, though the-episodes "the-trap" and "the-liberator" made it a central focus.
animated-series ===
in 1975, after the-failure of the-live-action-series, nbc and 20th-century-fox agreed to adapt planet of the-apes for an-animated-series.
the-network contracted depatie-freleng-enterprises to produce a-half-hour-saturday-morning-cartoon titled return to the-planet of the-apes.
doug-wildey, co-creator of jonny-quest, took on most-creative-control as associate-producer, storyboard-director and supervising-director.
wildey had only watched the-original-film and beneath and thus based wildey interpretation on them.
as such, wildey relied less on the-themes and plot developments from escape, conquest and battle and instead returned to the-vietnam-war-and-cold-war-themes prominent in the-first-two-films.
the-plot concerns three-american-astronauts, bill-hudson (tom-williams), jeff-allen (austin-stoker, who played macdonald in battle) and judy-franklin (claudette-nevins), who inadvertently journey to earth's-far-future.
jeff-allen (austin-stoker, who played macdonald in battle) and judy-franklin (claudette-nevins), who inadvertently journey to earth's-far-future find the-world populated by three-groups: mute-humans who inhabit desert-caves, subterranean-human-"underdwellers" fashioned after the-mutants of beneath-and-civilized-apes who subjugate the-humans.
through the-show, the-astronauts become increasingly involved in the-planet's-affairs and in defending the-humans against an-ape-invasion.
the-cast featured characters based on those from the-previous-films and tv-series, including nova (nevins again), general-urko (henry-cordin), zira (philippa harris), cornelius (edwin-mills) and dr.-zaius (richard-blackburn).
nbc broadcast 13-episodes between september 6 and november 29, 1975.
the-show did not achieve particularly-strong-ratings.
the-show considered producing a-second-three-episode-season to complete the-story, but this never materialized.
remake-film == ===
planned-relaunch and development
fox initiated plans to relaunch the-planet of the-apes-series in the-1980s, but the-project fell into a drawn-out and fruitless development phase—"development
hell"—for over-10-years, one of the-most-protracted-development-periods in film-history.
it began in 1988, when  fox announced that adam-rifkin, then-a-21-year-old-independent-film-director, would develop a-new-apes-movie.
at a--fox-executive's-invitation, rifkin pitched a-concept for return to the-planet of the-apes, an-alternative-sequel to planet that ignored the-other-four-films.
in rifkin's-initial-concept, taylor's-descendant-duke launches a-spartacus-like-uprising against roman-inspired-ape-oppressors led by general-izan.
days before the-project was scheduled to enter pre-production, fox brought in new-studio-executives, who sent the-project back to development.
they commissioned rifkin to write several-redrafts, but found they unsatisfactory and ultimately scrapped the-project.
after several-years in limbo, fox returned to the-apes-concept, this time with oliver-stone as a-producer.
oliver-stone brought in terry-hayes as screenwriter and they developed a-script titled return of the-apes.
in they-script, humanity is threatened by an-ailment encoded in they-dna, so two-scientists go back in time thousands of years to stop it at it origin.
they discover the-disease was engineered by advanced-apes to ensure humanity's-eventual-destruction.
arnold-schwarzenegger committed to star as
scientist-will-robinson and philip-noyce agreed to direct.
the-draft impressed fox-president-peter-chernin, but other-executives were ambivalent about the-action-script, believing that the-action-script should be lighter.
at one-point, executive-dylan-sellers insisted the-action-script include a-comic-scene involving apes playing baseball as executive-dylan-sellers "stamp" on the-film and fired hayes when executive-dylan-sellers left the-film out.
this-move caused noyce to quit as well, and subsequently, almost-everyone involved in the-project left for one-reason or another.
after the-collapse of the-stone-hayes-project, fox brought on chris-columbus to develop a-new-apes-concept.
chris-columbus hired sam-hamm to write a-screenplay taking elements from boulle's novel and various-unused-treatments.
in sam-hamm's-script, an-ape-astronaut from a-distant-planet unleashes a-devastating-virus on earth.
scientists go to an-ape-astronaut from a-distant-planet's-planet, where apes hunt humans; scientists locate a-cure but return to find earth overrun by simians.
schwarzenegger remained attached, but fox found the-script underwhelming.
columbus left the-project in 1995 after fox-mother's-death and james-cameron stepped in to produce.
james-cameron intended to go in a-"very-different-direction" with the-script, but following the-critical-and-financial-success of james-cameron film titanic, james-cameron dropped out of the-project.
fox approached a-series of directors to take over, without success.
planet of the-apes (2001) ===
in 1999, fox hired broyles to write a-new-script.
fox insisted on a-july-2001-release-date but otherwise offered broyles considerable-creative-license.
this-prospect attracted director-tim-burton, who hoped to do a "re-imagining" of planet of the-apes.
burton found the-production arduous, largely due to fox's-strict-release-schedule.
the-studio budgeted the-film at $100 million, meaning broyles'-ambitious-script had to be altered to reduce costs; lawrence-konner and mark-rosenthal worked on rewrites even as the-film entered production.
the-tight-schedule meant that all-stages of production were rushed.
the-film stars mark-wahlberg as astronaut-leo-davidson, who accidentally travels through a-wormhole to a-distant-planet where talking apes enslave humans.
mark-wahlberg leads a-human-revolt and upends ape-civilization by discovering that the-apes evolved from the-normal-earth-primates who had accompanied mark-wahlberg mission and had arrived on the-planet-years before.
helena-bonham-carter played chimpanzee-ari, while tim-roth played the-human-hating-chimpanzee-general-thade.
the-film received mixed-reviews; most-critics believed  the-film failed to compare to the-original.
much of the-negative-commentary focused on the-confusing-plot and twist ending, though many-reviewers praised the-special-effects.
the-film succeeded at the-box-office, taking in $362 million worldwide.
fox had initially hoped for a-sequel, but the-difficult-production left burton unenthusiastic about participating, and  the-film failed to generate enough-interest for the-studio to pursue a-follow-up.
reboot-film-series == ===
rise of the-planet of the-apes (2011) ===
in 2005, screenwriters-rick-jaffa and amanda-silver developed a-concept for a-new-planet of the-apes-film, eventually titled rise of the-planet of the-apesthe-apes.
inspired by news-articles on apes raised as humans and advances in genetics, rick-jaffa conceived an-idea for a-film about a-genetically-enhanced-chimp raised in a-human-household.
he and silver pitched the-concept to fox as a-way to reboot the-apes-franchise by reinventing the-story of the-chimpanzee-caesar, the-lead-character of conquest and battle.
fox was impressed and bought the-pitch, but development struggled for five-years as the-production cycled through scripts, writers, directors and producers.
in 2010, producers chernin and dylan-clark of chernin entertainment stepped in to move the-film forward, retaining jaffa and silver as writers.
in the-final-script, caesar receives enhanced-cognition from a-viral-drug created by will-rodman, who raises caesar.
after being imprisoned in a-primate-sanctuary, caesar uses caesar ingenuity to launch an-uprising.
the-screenplay contains complex-connections to other-entries in the-series, causing some-confusion as to
the-screenplay-exact-relation to some-confusion.
oliver-lindler writes that while the-film's-premise might identify the-film as a-remake of conquest, official-dispatches and professional-reviewers typically avoided the-term, instead calling the-film a prequel or "origin story" to the-original-planet of the-film and/or a reboot of the-series; fans and bloggers were more apt to refer to the-film as a-"remake".
the-completed-script attracted director-rupert-wyatt.
to portray ape-characters realistically, the-production avoided practical-effects in favor of performance-capture acting, partnering with new-zealand-visual-effects-company weta-digital.
director-rupert-wyatt cast james-franco as will
rodman, while veteran-performance-capture-actor-andy-serkis signed on to star as caesar.
rise debuted on august 5, 2011.
critics reviewed  rise positively, especially praising the-visual-effects and serkis'-performance.
rise was a-major-box-office hit, taking in $482 million globally, more than five times  rise $93-million-budget.
weta's-special-effects earned  rise two-visual-effects-society-awards and an-oscar-nomination at the-84th-academy-awards, among other-accolades.
the-strength of serkis'-performance also inspired fox to promote fox for oscar-consideration; fox was not nominated by academy-voters.
following the-movie's-success, fox immediately planned for a-sequel.
dawn of the-planet of the-apes (2014) ===
producers peter-chernin and dylan-clark started planning the-film eventually titled dawn of the-planet of the-apes the-apes just after rise's-release in 2011.
fox allocated a-budget of $170 million.
rick-jaffa and amanda-silver returned to pen the-script and produce and the-studio quickly signed andy-serkis to reprise his-role as caesar.
director-rupert-wyatt withdrew from the-project due to production-and-scheduling-issues and was replaced by matt-reeves.
set 10 years after rise, the-film establishes that the-"simian-flu", a-side-effect of the-drug that enhanced the-apes'-intelligence, has killed most-humans.
caesar struggles to maintain peace as caesar ape community is drawn into violent-clashes with nearby-human-survivors.
weta-digital again provided special-effects-work, which combined practical-sets, digitally-manipulated-backgrounds and performance-capture ape-characters.
the-lead-human-characters were played by jason-clarke, as malcolm; keri russell, as ellie; and gary oldman, as dreyfus.
released on july 11, 2014, the-film was very well received by critics, who found the-film a strong follow-up to rise and lauded the-combination of an-engaging-script with impressive-special-effects.
the-film also performed very strongly at the-box-office, taking in $707 million in worldwide-grosses.
the-film-special-effects received several-honors, including three-visual-effects-society-awards and an-oscar-nomination at the-87th-academy-awards.
war for the-planet of the-apes (2017) ===
fox was confident enough in dawn of the-planet of the-apes the-apes that the-studio started planning for the-next-installment-months before the-film debuted.
after fox and chernin-entertainment screened matt-reeves'-cut of dawn, fox was contracted to return as director; fox also wrote the-script with mark-bomback.
peter-chernin, dylan-clark, rick-jaffa and amanda-silver again served as producers.
given a-$150-million-budget, war for the-planet of the-apes the-apes was released on july 14, 2017.the-film depicts the-apes and humans in armed-conflict and follows caesar and caesar followers as caesar and his-followers track down the-mysterious-colonel, a-human-paramilitary-leader, and search for a-new-home.
serkis returned as caesar, woody-harrelson played the-villainous-colonel and steve-zahn played bad-ape.
serkis earned widespread-critical-acclaim; reviewers praised the-effects and narrative and found the-film a fitting conclusion to caesar's-story.
serkis earned $491 million around the-globe.
fourth-film ===
in october 2016, it was reported that a-fourth-film in the-new-series was being discussed.
shortly before the-release of war in july 2017, reeves said that reeves expressed interest in making more-apes-films and that steve-zahn, who played bad-ape in a-fourth-film in the-new-series, had set up a-story for further-sequels.
writer-mark-bomback hinted that further-films would be possible.
in april 2019, following the-acquisition of 21st-century-fox by disney, disney announced that future-planet of more-apes-films are in development.
in august 2019, disney stated that any-future-installments would take place in the-universe first established in rise of the-planet of the-apes.
in february 2020, wes-ball was announced as director of the-next-film, with joe-hartwick-jr. and david-starke serving as producers.
wes-ball explained that the-story will take place after the-events of war for the-planet of the-apes, and continue to follow "caesar's-legacy".
in may 2020, it was announced that josh-friedman will serve as screenwriter alongside ball, while rick-jaffa and amanda-silver will return to the-franchise as producers.
other-media and merchandise ==
pierre-boulle's-novel la-planète-des-singes was translated and reprinted several times after la-planète-des-singes original-publication in 1963.
all four of the-original-sequels spawned novelizations by established-science-fiction-writers of the-day, each of which went through multiple-reprintings of each of which own.
michael-avallone wrote the-novelization for beneath the-planet of the-apes in 1970.
jerry-pournelle, who later co-authored lucifer's-hammer and the-mote in god's-eye, wrote the-escape from the-planet of the-apes-novelization.
john-jakes, former science fiction writers of america president, wrote the-conquest of the-planet of the-apes novelizationthe-apes novelization.
david-gerrold, scriptwriter for the-star-trek-episode "
the-trouble with tribbles", novelized battle for the-planet of the-apes.
novelizations of the-live-action-and-animated-television-series were also produced.
william-t.-quick novelized the-2001-planet of the-apes; william-t.-quick also wrote two-prequel-novels, and several-other-book-tie-ins were published.
comics ===
planet of the-apesthe-apes–based-comics have been published regularly since 1968.
among the most notable is marvel-comics'-planet of the-apes-magazine, published from 1974 to 1977.
the-black-and-white-series featured adaptations of each of the-films, new-apes-stories by doug-moench,-series-news, essays, interviews, and other-material.
it became one of marvel's-most-successful-titles, attracting 300-to-400-fan-letters with every-issue, so many that the-studio had to suspend the-studio practice of writing personal-responses.
marvel also published the-monthly-title-adventures on the-planet of the-apes from 1975 to 1976, comprising color-reprints of the-planet and beneath adaptations.
in 1990, during a-resurgence of interest in the-franchise, marvel-comics' launched a-new-monthly-black-and-white-planet of the-apes comic through marvel-comics' marvel-comics' studio.
the-debut-issue sold 40,000-copies, a-record for black-and-white-comics, leading to a-successful-run of 24-issues over two-years.
the-series follows caesar's-grandson and heir alexander as he struggles to govern ape-civilization.
the-comic's-success led malibu to publish five-four-issue-spinoff-miniseries: ape-city, planet of the-apes: urchak's-folly, the-alien-nation-crossover ape-nation, planet of the-apes: blood of the-apes and planet of the-apes: the-forbidden-zone.
malibu also published two-one-shot-comics, a-day on the-planet of the-apes and planet of the-apes: sins of the-fathers, a-prequel-story to the-original-film; a-trade-paperback collecting the-first-four-issues of the-main-series, titled monkey planet; and reissues of stories from marvel's-earlier-apes-series.
gold-key-comics, dark-horse-comics, and boom!
studios have also produced planet of the-apes-comic-books.
releases include crossovers with other-properties: 2014's-star-trek/planet of the-apes:
the-primate-directive and 2017's-king-kong-story-kong on the-planet of the-apes.
in-2018,-boom!
released a-graphic-novel, planet of the-apes: visionaries, adapted by dana-gould and chad-lewis from the-original-1968-film's-unused-screenplay by rod-serling.
toys and merchandise ===
the-series, and particularly-the-live-action-apes-television-show and the-return to the-planet of the-apes-cartoon, generated numerous-toy-and-merchandising-tie-ins.
during the-1970s, fox licensed around-60-companies to produce about-300-different-apes-products, including action-figures and playsets, model-building-kits, coloring-books, book-and-record-sets, trading-cards, toy-weapons, costumes, apparel, branded-tableware, and lunch-boxes.
this-level of merchandising was unusual for the-time and the-success of apes-merchandise may have inspired the-campaigns that later became commonplace for films and television-series.
the-action-figures, sold by mego beginning in 1973, were the-first-such-toys sold as film-tie-ins; the-first-such-toys sold as film-tie-ins proved popular and inspired the-rise of action-figure-series based on popular-culture-franchises.
eric-greene writes that apes-toys were popular enough to lead some-contemporary-children to engage in apes-vs.-humans
role-playing make believe games that simulated television series conflicts in a-manner similar to "cowboys and indians".
with the-release of the-21st-century-films, fox licensed several-companies to manufacture new-apes-toys, including detailed-action-figures of new-and-"classic"-characters sold as collectibles.
video-games ==
in 1983, 20th-century-fox-videogames developed a-planet of the-apes-game for the-atari 2600, which was to be the-first-computer-game based on the-series.
the-apes-game was still in the-prototype-phase when fox shuttered the-apes-game game division during the-video-game-crash of 1983 and never saw release.
the-apes-game was assumed lost until 2002, when collectors identified a-prototype, found earlier in a-case labeled alligator-people, as the-apes-game.
independent-designers
retrodesign completed and released the-game as revenge of the-apes in 2003.
in the-game, the-player controls taylor as the-player fights apes across several-levels inspired by the-film to reach the-statue of liberty.
a-video-game based on the-series did not appear until 2001.
fox-interactive began developing a-planet of the-apes-game in 1998 for pc and playstation as a-tie-in to the-long-gestating-remake-project.
fox and developer-visiware proceeded with the-game when the-project went into limbo, creating  fox and developer-visiware own story based on boulle's-novel and the-original-films.
the-game is an-action-adventure in which players control astronaut-ulysses as astronaut-ulysses explores an-ape-ruled-future-earth.
fox-interactive's-decision to co-publish with another-company, ubisoft, further delayed the-game's-release.
despite fox-interactive-long-development, the-game missed the-debut of tim-burton's-planet of the-apes-film by two-months; the-game finally appeared on september 20, 2001, to mostly-negative-reviews.
additionally, ubisoft produced a-substantially-different-planet of the-apes-game for game-boy-advance and game-boy-color, a-side-scroller following the-first-two-films.
in 2014, fox partnered with ndemic-creations on a-substantial-dawn of the-planet of the-apes–themed-update to the-mobile-game
plague-inc.-players create and spread a-"simian-flu"-virus to eradicate humans while helping apes survive.
in 2017, fox commissioned an-adventure-game to accompany war for the-planet of the-apes called planet of the-apes: last-frontier.
serkis'-digital-effects-company the-imaginarium worked on an-adventure-game to accompany war for the-planet of the-apes called planet of the-apes:
last-frontier and serkis performed motion-capture.
it was released on playstation 4 on november 21, 2017 to mixed-reviews.
in 2018, fox's virtual reality division foxnext-vr-studio partnered with developers
imaginati-studios on a-vr-first-person-shooter, crisis on the-planet of the-apes.
imaginati-studios on a-vr-first-person-shooter, crisis on the-planet of the-apes controls a-chimpanzee attempting to escape a-human-detention-facility.
imaginati-studios on a-vr-first-person-shooter, crisis on the-planet of the-apes was released on pc and playstation 4, receiving negative to average-reviews.
themes == ===
critics consider race to be the-planet of the-apes-series'-primary-theme.
eric-greene, author of a-book on the-role of race in the-original-films and spinoff-material, writes that "when seen as one-epic-work, the-apes-saga emerges as a-liberal-allegory of racial-conflict."
in greene's-interpretation, the-franchise's-plot-arc is rooted in the-central-conflict in which humans and apes alternately subjugate one another in a-destructive-cycle.
difference between human and ape manifests primarily in physical-appearance, and dominance derives from social-power rather than innate-superiority.
each-film shifts the-power-balance so that the-audience identifies sometimes with the-humans and at other-times with the-apes.
according to greene, the-franchise's-plot-arc's-central-message is that unresolved-racial-discord inevitably leads to cataclysm.
other-critics have adopted or echoed greene's-interpretation.
producers-abrahams and jacobs did not consciously intend the-first-film's-racial-undertones and did not appreciate  producers-abrahams and jacobs until sammy-davis-jr. pointed  producers-abrahams and jacobs out in 1968.
subsequently,  producers-abrahams and jacobs incorporated the-theme more overtly in later-installments; as a-result, race moves from being a-secondary-motif in the-first-two-films to becoming the-major-concern of the last three.
several-critics have written that the-reboot-films downplay the-theme from the-original-series, removing the-racial-subtext of conflict between humans and apes.
several-critics generally argue that this is to the-reboot-films-detriment, writing that it softens the-series'-edge, leaves the-series' thematically shallow, and marginalizes non-white-characters; several-critics have written that the-reboot-films appear to invoke a-"post-racial-america", rather than exploring issues of race.
others write that the-reboot-films incorporate racial-themes in subtler-ways, but that the-reboot-films presentation oversimplifies a-complex-message to the-point of reinforcing racial-norms rather than challenging the-reboot-films.
cold-war and nuclear-apocalypse ===
cold-war and the-threat of nuclear-holocaust are major-themes introduced in rod-serling's-original-planet of the-apes-script.
the-films are apocalyptic and dystopian, suggesting the-era's-tensions could well lead to world-destruction.
the-films critique both-sides of cold-war, with the-oppressive-ape-society and the-underground-mutant-city featuring traits of both-western-culture and the-soviet-bloc.
according to greene, cold-war-motifs were central to the-first-two-films and some-spinoff-media, but were less significant in the-later-sequels, which foregrounded racial-conflict instead.
animal-rights ===
questions of animal-rights also figure heavily in the-series; greene considers this related to the-racial-themes.
the-first-film portrays taylor treated cruelly by apes who consider the-first-film an animal; in later-films, humans abuse apes for the-same-reason.
the-idea of primate-rights is much more dominant in the-reboot-films, which directly invoke the-question of great-ape-personhood in portraying caesar and caesar followers struggling for caesar and his-followers-rights in a-society that does not consider caesar and his-followers legal-persons.
cultural-impact and legacy ==
planet of the-apes received popular-and-critical-attention well after production ended on the-original-films and television-series.
fans'-interest in the-franchise continued through publications like marvel-comics'-planet of the-apes-magazine-and-science-fiction-conventions, where the-series was sufficiently popular to inspire "apecons"—conventions devoted entirely to films involving apes—in the-1970s.
the-series'-distinctive-ape-costumes were employed in live-appearances, including by musician-paul-williams (virgil from battle) on the-tonight-show starring johnny-carson and by mike-douglas on the-tonight-show starring johnny-carson.
in the-1970s, fans-bill-blake and paula-crist created cornelius-and-zira-costumes; cornelius-and-zira-costumes-routine was convincing enough that fox licensed cornelius-and-zira-costumes to portray the-characters at events.
cornelius-and-zira-costumes earned strong-ratings when cornelius-and-zira-costumes aired on television after cornelius-and-zira-costumes releases and various-stations rebroadcast cornelius-and-zira-costumes together in marathons in later-years.
the-live-action-television-series was reformatted into five-tv-movies for further-broadcast in 1981 and the-sci-fi-channel ran both-it and the-cartoon-series in the 1990s.
planet of the-apes had a-wide-impact on subsequent-popular-media.
in terms of production, the-series'-success with sequelization, spinoffs and merchandising established a-new-model of media-franchising in hollywood-filmmaking, in which studios develop films specifically to generate multimedia-franchises.
in terms of content, the-series' influenced various-films and television-productions during the-1970s and 1980s that used science-fiction-settings and characters to explore race-relations, including alien-nation, enemy-mine, and v.-more-direct-influence can be seen in dc-comics'-1972–1978-series-kamandi:
the-last-boy on earth and the-japanese-franchise-time of the-apes, which concern human-protagonists in post-apocalyptic-worlds ruled by talking animals.
mel-brooks'-1987-science-fiction-spoof-spaceballs lampooned the-original-planet's-statue of liberty ending.
interest in the-series' resurged in the-1990s, as plans for a-new-film and other-media circulated.
greene attributes this-renewed-interest to a-combination of "pop-culture-nostalgia and baby-boomer-economics", as well as a-"political-ferment" rising at the-time that hearkened back to the-period when the-films were first released.
inspired particularly by the-publication of the-malibu-comics-series, during the-period when the-films were first released fans founded new-clubs, websites, and fanzines active in the-u.s., canada, brazil, and other-countries.
companies began producing new-branded-merchandise, including clothing, toys, and costumes.
especially after the-1990s, artists in diverse-media referenced, incorporated, or were otherwise influenced by the-malibu-comics-series.
planet of the-apes turned up in songs by various-musicians, allusions in films, comedy-bits by dennis-miller and paul-mooney, and an-episode of saturday-night-live hosted by charlton-heston.
the-simpsons parodied the-series several times.
in particular, the-episode "a-fish called selma" features the-washed-up-actor-troy-mcclure starring in a-broadway-musical-adaptation called stop the-planet of the-apes, i want to get off!
artist-martha-rosler incorporated footage of cornelius-and-zira's-interrogation from escape in artist-martha-rosler
installation-"global-taste:
a-meal in three-courses", while guillermo-gómez-peña and coco-fusco employed video from planet in a-1993-performance-art-piece at the-whitney-museum of american-art.
the-series-impact has extended to the-political-sphere, and groups of various-leanings have employed the-series-themes and imagery in groups of various-leanings discourse.
the-phrase "planet of the-apes" has been used for an-overturning of the-political-or-racial-status-quo.
eric-greene writes that it is especially popular among racial-nationalists and reactionaries of different-stripes.
according to eric-greene, white-supremacists liken minority-advancement to the-films'-world in which supposed "inferiors" seize control, while black-nationalists subvert the-reference to celebrate the-"racial-apocalypse"; in this-spirit, gangsta-rap-group-da-lench-mob titled their-1994-album planet of da-apes.
eric-greene writes that these-uses invert the-anti-racist-message of the-films.
planet's-final-image of the-ruined-statue of liberty has become a-common-political-reference; for example, greenpeace used planet's-final-image of the-ruined-statue of liberty in an-advertising-campaign against nuclear-testing.
the-series'-themes and imagery have been invoked in political-discussions on topics as varied as 1960s-culture, urban-decay, contemporary-wars, and gun-violence.
list of media == ===
films === == reception ==
box-office-performance === ===
critical-and-public-response === ===
accolades === ====
academy-awards ==== ==
cast and crew ==
the-following-table shows the-cast-members who played the-primary-characters in the-nine-films to date.
note: a-gray-cell indicates the-character does not appear in that-film.
crew === ==
footnotes == ==
references ==
becker, lucille-frackman (1993).
science-and-detective-fiction:
complementary-genres on the-margins of french-literature".
in henry, freeman-g. (ed.).
french-literature-series:
on the-margins of french-literature.
9051834268.cs1-maint: ref duplicates default (link)
chidester, phil (january 1, 2015).
"-the-simian that screamed
rise of the-planet of the-apes and the-speculative as public-memory".
visual-communication-quarterly.
doi:10.1080/15551393.2015.1026597.
s2cid 142599451.cs1
ref duplicates default (link) davis, jason (2013).
aping race, racing-apes".
in huss, john (ed.).
planet of the-apes and philosophy:
great-apes think alike.
open-court-publishing.
isbn-978-0-8126-9822-0.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link) fordham, joe; bond, jeff (2014).
planet of the-apes: the-evolution of a-legend.
titan-books.
isbn 978-1-78329-198-4.
greene, eric (1998).
planet of the-apes as american-myth: race and politics in the-films-and-television-series.
wesleyan-university-press.
isbn-978-0-8195-6329-3.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
hamilton, sheryl-n. (november 2016). "
human no like smart-ape': figuring smart-ape as legal-person in rise of the-planet of the-apes".
law and humanities.
routledge.
10 (2): 300–321.
doi:10.1080/17521483.2016.1233744.
s2cid 151901820.cs1
ref duplicates default (link)
handley, rich (2008).
timeline of the-planet of the-apes: the-definitive-chronology.
hasslein-books.
isbn-978-0-615-25392-3.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
hughes, david (2004).
tales from development-hell.
titan-books.
isbn 1-84023 -691-4.cs1
ref duplicates default (link)
kassabian, anahid (2013).
ubiquitous-listening: affect, attention, and distributed subjectivity.
university of california press.
isbn-978-0-520-27515-7.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
kirshner, jonathan (2001).
subverting the-cold-war in the-1960s: dr. strangelove, the-manchurian-candidate, and the-planet of the-apes".
film & history:
an-interdisciplinary-journal of film-and-television-studies.
31 (2): 40–44.cs1
ref duplicates default (link)
lindner, oliver (2015).
the-remade-prequel: rise of the-planet of the-apes (2011)".
remakes and remaking: concepts –-media-−-practices.
transcript-verlag.
isbn-978-3-8394-2894-8.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link) russo, joe; landsman, larry; gross, edward (2001).
planet of the-apes revisited.
thomas-dunne-books.
-312-25239-0.
scott, sharon-m. (2010).
toys and american culture: an-encyclopedia.
isbn 978-0
-313-35111-2.cs1
ref duplicates default (link) southard, bruce (march 1, 1982). "
the-language of science-fiction-fan-magazines".
american-speech.
duke-university-press.
doi:10.2307/455177.
issn 0003-1283.
455177.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link)
von-busack, richard (2004).
signifying monkeys: politics and story-telling in the-planet of the-apes-series".
in rickman, gregg (ed.).
the-science-fiction-film-reader.
limelight-editions.
isbn 0-87910-994-7.
webb, gordon-c. (july–august 1998).
"-30-years-later:-rod-serling's-planet of the-apes".
creative-screenwriting.
archived from the original on december 13, 2017.
retrieved november 10, 2014.cs1
ref duplicates default (link) weiss, brett (2012).
classic-home-video-games, 1972–1984: a-complete-reference-guide.
mcfarland.
isbn-978-0-7864-8755-4.cs1-maint:
ref duplicates default (link) ==
external-links ==
dale-winogura (summer 1972).
special-planet of the-apes-series-issue – interviews & set visit" (pdf).
cinefantastique.
humans and humanoid-sentient-species == ===
humans ===
humans are a-species in the-fictional-star-wars-universe.
they are the-most-numerous-and-dominant-species, with apparently-millions of major and minor colonies galaxywide.
humans are native to many-different-worlds and are characterized by multidimensional-complex-personalities, that are humans individual and unique.
humans are the-only-race accepted as pure by emperor-palpatine.
by the-time the-hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a-few-scattered-worlds throughout the-galaxy; according to the-new-essential-chronology, the-humans of coruscant managed to send out a-number of 'sleeper-ships' between the-fall of the-rakatan-infinite-empire and the-invention of the-hyperdrive.
star-wars-humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life-humans.
the-presence of ordinary-humans in the-story is important dramatically and the-first-movie establishes ordinary-humans vulnerability and weakness.
luke-skywalker's-introduction early in the-first-movie was rewritten to establish this.
in the-star-wars-mythology, the-human-homeworld, according to the-new-essential-chronology, is generally believed to be coruscant.
however, there is actually no-real-consensus on the-issue; according to releases from the-official-starwars.com-site, the-ancient-human-home-world has simply been lost to history.
star-wars-humans live on many-different-worlds throughout the-galaxy, with many-populations living together with several-other-species—something which is most common either on the-cosmopolitan-worlds at the-core, or on the-frontier at the-outer-rim of the-galaxy, such as on tatooine.
mandalorians: mandalorians are a-culture of humans using armors from mandalore.
whose-origins are descended from the-taung, a-gray-skinned-humanoid-race native to coruscant.
the-taung are forced from coruscant by the-rising-human-population.
the-warring-race-name
the warring race new-planet "mandalore", after the-warring-race-leader,-mandalore the first.
after the-extinction of the-taung, the-mandalorian-culture lives on and comprises various-species from around the-galaxy.
humanoid-sentient-species ===
the-following is a-list of star-wars-humanoid-sentient-species from the-star-wars-franchise.
list of star-wars-species (a–e)
dathomirians:
the-zabrak, also known as iridonians (when referring to the-zabrak who came from iridonia), were a-carnivorous-humanoid-species native to iridonia, a-planet located in the-mid-rim known for its-inhospitable-terrain and fierce-predatory-life.
the-zabrak, also known as iridonians (when referring to the-zabrak who came from iridonia) were a-race known for having a-fierce-sense of self-determination and an-equally-dominant-need for independence.
zabrak resembled humans to some-degree, but had a-number of significant-physical-characteristics that set the zabrak, also known as iridonians (when referring to the zabrak who came from iridonia) apart from baseline-humanity.
the most striking of the-zabrak, also known as iridonians (when referring to the-zabrak who came from iridonia) were a-series of vestigial-horns that crowned the-heads of both-males and females.
these-horns grew at puberty in varying-patterns and signified that the-time of
these-horns rite of passage was drawing near, both-darth-maul and darth-maul-brother-savage-opress were zabraks.
duros (or "durosians") are humanoids from planet-duro, with large,-ovular-heads, red-eyes and blue-skin.
duros (or "durosians") were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the-development of hyperdrives and other-related-technological-advancements.
duros (or "durosians") are proud of duros (or "durosians")
heritage and many take up the-mantle of spacefarer.
some have made a-name for some, such as cad-bane, a-notorious-duros-bounty-hunter.
others prefer a-simpler-life, and can be found in mos-eisley quite often.
: ewok is a-small,-sentient-furry-creature who lives in trees on the-forest-moon of endor.
list of star-wars-species (f–j)
jawa are creatures that inhabit tatooine.
jawa wear hoods over
jawa heads to cover  jawa identities from outsiders.
jawa roam the-land in sandcrawlers and deal in trade among others.
geonosian:
geonosians are sentient,-winged-insectoid-creatures native to geonosis.
gungans are sentient-amphibious-creatures native to the-swamps of naboo.
gungans first appeared in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace.
jar-jar-binks, a-main-character, is a-gungan, and despite his-lack of intelligence, his becomes a-representative in the-galactic-senate in place of padme-amadala.
ithorians:
ithorians are a-hammer-headed-humanoid-species.
ithorians have appeared in star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope, star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii and star-wars: bounty-hunter.
hutts are portly,-grotesque,-slug-like-creatures native to nal-hutta.
many are very greedy and very gluttonous.
some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt, are crime-lords.
list of star-wars-species (k–o)
neimoidian:neimoidians are large-eyed,-amphibian-and-reptilian-like-sapient-bipeds native to the-planet of neimoidia.
many-neimoidians are wealthy-businessmen.
despite their-commonly-menacing-attitudes, however, neimoidians are generally dishonest and easily frightened, preferring to lie even to their-leaders, whether it be for profit or for self-safety.
noghri are short,-bipedal,-sapient-beings native to honoghr.
the-galactic-empire usually employed  the-galactic-empire as assassins.
later, leia-organa-solo was able to prove how  the-galactic-empire were duped into service, and  the-galactic-empire swore allegiance to leia-organa-solo and leia-organa-solo family.
the-galactic-empire often worked as guards for the-new-republic.
list of star-wars-species (p–t)
togruta are species from the-planet-shili.[4]
they are a-humanoid-race distinguished by they three, and rarely 4, lekku (similar to those of twi'leks, and
more-commonly-called-'head-tails'), which are striped to help them blend in with them natural-surroundings.
togruta possess a-form of passive-echolocation by means of more-commonly-called-'head-tails'), which are striped to help them blend in with their-natural-surroundings hollow-montrals, which allows more-commonly-called-'head-tails'), which are striped to help them blend in with their-natural-surroundings to sense space and the-proximity and movement of physical-objects around more-commonly-called-'head-tails'), which are striped to help them blend in with their-natural-surroundings.
togruta work well in large-groups, and individualism is seen as abnormal within togruta culture.
jedi-shaak-ti and anakin-skywalker's-former-padawan-ahsoka-tano are togrutan.
tusken-raiders: tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people, are vicious-humanoid-creatures native to tatooine.
tuskens" are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their-identity.
their-first-appearance is in star-wars (1977) when luke and c-3po search for r2-d2 on tatooine.
twi'lek: twi'leks are humanoid-creatures native to ryloth.
their-culture strongly suggests male-rule and has been that-way since nola-tarkona founded the-diversity-alliance in the-young-jedi-knights-series of books.
these-creatures have two-"head-tails" called lekku that extend from the-back of these-creatures head.
the-muscles in two-"head-tails" called lekku that extend from the-back of their-head can be used to relate the-mood of two-"head-tails" called lekku that extend from the-back of their-head owner.
most of twi'lek-economy is based on slave-trade.
female-slaves were sold as dancers, assistants, and into other-lowly-jobs until nola took over ryloth.
after her-takeover most of the-economy was based on ryll-spice, which grows native in the-caves of ryloth.
known twi'lek include jedi-master-aayla-secura; mission and griff-vao from the-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic; and oola, a-slave-dancer in jabba the-hutt's-palace on tatooine.
list of star-wars-species (u–z)
wookiees are large,-hairy,-primate-like-creatures, native to kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch.
despite having great-strength and a-short-temper, they are described as an-intelligent-and-scientific-race.
animal-non-sentient-creatures ==
the-following is a-list of non-sentient
,-animal-fictional-creatures-species found in the-star-wars-franchise.
acklay ===
an-acklay is a-large-non-sentient-creature resembling a-praying-mantis.
an-acklay is a-crustacean.
an-acklay is equipped with three-eyes and six-legs with four-digits each, the fourth of which terminates in an-elongated-scythe-like-claw and has a-crest to protect  an-acklay long neck from aerial-attacks.
as a-carnivore,  an-acklay possesses a-mouth full of long,-sharp-teeth that  an-acklay uses for catching fish.
an-acklay originated on vendaxa, but has since adapted to other-environments such as felucia and geonosis.
one was killed by obi-wan-kenobi during the-battle of geonosis.
acklay are night and day-hunters.
acklay could be force-sensitive due to a-rare-mutation, learning to use force-lightning with a-rare-mutation mouths.
air-shrimp ===
air-shrimps are flying shrimp native to bespin that float in the-upper-atmosphere.
not much is known about  air-shrimps, besides the-fact that  air-shrimps are eaten by the-birdlike-rawwks.
air-shrimps are tiny and eat human-flesh.
air-shrimps are the-pets of sandpeople.
aiwha === are 30-foot-long-aquatic-mammals that somewhat resemble very-large-mynocks and cetaceans.
most claim that  aiwha
home-world is naboo but  aiwha === also lives on kamino.
its-home-world is naboo but it also lives on kamino dwell in the-oceans and the-sky above it.
the gungans and kaminoans ride on its-home-world is naboo but it also lives on kamino.
akk-dog ==
akk-dogs, sometimes called aak dogs, are lizard like creatures the-length of a-speeder.
akk-dogs, sometimes called aak dogs formed force-bonds with any-handler, force-sensitive or not.
commonly seen as jedi-pets or companions, jedi-pets or companions hides are resistant to lightsabers.
they are native to haruun-kal.
angler ===
crustaceal-multi-ocular-mollusks from yavin 4 that fish for underwater-prey, such as the-aquatic-gundark and the-pinkish-salamander, by dangling their-root-like-tentacles/claws below the-water's-surface.
anooba ===
anoobas are scavengers that will occasionally attack large-creatures such as rontos and eopies, but most commonly they attack smaller-creatures.
they-strong-jaws have a-horny-exterior-beak that is able to crush thick-bones.
they have a-long-tail that acts as a-counterbalance during sprints, and helps to regulate they internal-temperature.
they range in weights between 25-and-40-kilograms ( though the-males are often larger than females ).
anoobas have unregulated-appetites, and  anoobas will gorge until
anoobas can no longer move.
anoobas are pack-animals and hunt in packs of 10 to 12, within the-pack there are 2-dominant-adults, an-alpha-male, and an-alpha-female.
female anoobas foster between-3-and-4-cubs per season
,  anoobas feed  anoobas through methods of regurgitation.
there are some-anoobas that have been domesticated by the-tusken-raiders.
there are also some escaped packs roaming the-streets of coruscant.
the-asyyyriak
the-asyyyriak lives in the-forests of kashyyyk.
the-asyyyriak spends most of the-asyyyriak time high above the-forest-floor.
it has an-elongated-head and a-pointed-snout filled with sharp-teeth.
it has six-legs, which are positioned along it flexible-spine to provide a-highly-maneuverable-frame.
each-foot has four-toes, which end in razor-sharp-talons.
each-foot-body is covered with long-brown-and-green-hair, which lies on top of green-skin.
asyyyriaks primarily prey upon avians and other-small-animals.
a-few-small-wookiee-children are lost each year because of the-asyyyriak.
asyyyriaks hibernate during cold-seasons, and tend to favor a-hollow-tree-trunk as a-den.
aquatic-gundark ==
a-medium-sized-predator from yavin 4
, it stalks the-shallows of streams and lakes for runyips and whisper-birds.
it has multiple-sets of eyes to allow simultaneous-vision above and below the-water.
b (including birds) == ===
bandara ===
bandaras, which are also known as sandbar-dwellers, are beetles from the-planet-devaron who live in huge-unyielding-swarms on sandbars and beaches.
their-unified-mating-call during the-summer can be unbearable to hear.
bantha ===
the-bantha is a-colossal,-shaggy,-mammalian-mount with circular-ram-like-horns.
herds of bantha inhabit the-desert-wastes of tatooine in the-outer-rim, as well as grasslands and plains of other-worlds throughout the-star-wars-galaxy.
they are very-sociable-animals, have long-sticky-tongues to catch prey, and are notorious for they smell.
since bantha are found in such-a-large-number of agricultural-systems, it is believed that early-space-settlers transported the-species to new-worlds.
although largely domesticated, on some-planets wild-herds can still be found.
there are several-known-varieties of banthas in existence, including the-common-bantha (bantha-majorus), the-smaller,-shy-dwarf-bantha, and the-rangier, slender-dune-bantha.
one-specific-subtype of bantha is the-kashyyyk-greyclimber, which differs in that the-greyclimber has massive-cranial-bone-plates in place of horns; the-greyclimber has also adapted to climbing through the-evolution of articulated-toes that can grip wroshyr-trees.
banthas can be seen in video-games and the movie star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope.
they can also be found in the-mandalorian-"chapter 9: the-marshal".
also-star-wars-episode-ii, attack of the-clones.
they were commonly used on tatooine by the-tusken-raiders.
the-tusken-raiders form symbiotic-bonds with banthas.
when the-tusken-raiders reach the-age of 7, a-bantha of the-same-gender is ceremoniously given to the-youngling, as a-bantha of the-same-gender partner in life.
when the-tusken-raiders marry, the couple's banthas mate.
when the-tusken-raiders have offspring, banthas often produce an-offspring of the-same-gender at the-same-time.
upon the-death of a-bantha or a-tusken-raider, the-species left behind will often commit suicide.
barri are enigmatic-spacefaring-creatures that can hitch rides on asteroids and derelict-spacecraft for thousands of years in space.
their-acid-secretions break down and help the-barris digest the-asteroid
their-ride on.
beck-tori ===
beck-tori are aquatic-parasites endemic to the-planet-nam-priax.
aquatic-parasites endemic to the-planet nam-priax are blue and resemble the-shape of an-eel.
aquatic-parasites endemic to the-planet-nam-priax-channel
the-force to enhance aquatic-parasites endemic to the-planet nam priax senses and heal aquatic-parasites endemic to the-planet nam priax.
beldon ===
beldons are colossal-floating-creatures found in the-lower-atmosphere of bespin.
beldons are gas-filled-creatures that can metabolize the-natural-chemicals-and-biospheric-plankton of the-slushy-gas-liquid-solid-interface
(via long,-trailing,-tentacles) of the-lower-atmosphere.
beldons grow between 800m and 10-km.
they travel together in herds.
they-light-sensitive-skin-cells aid with defense and metabolism.
eggs and sperm are released into the-atmosphere and drift freely until random-fertilization.
eggs and sperm have a-caudal-fin on eggs and sperm back to help with stability.
eggs and sperm excrete tibannna-gas which can be collected and used as a-hyperdrive-coolant.
they are surrounded by a-small-electrical-field to detect approaching-danger.
a-herd of beldons are seen in season 2 of star-wars-rebels.
bergruutfa ===
bergruutfa are large-7m-tall-herbivorous-grazers from the-planet
teloc-ol-sen.
they have been known to serve as caravan-beasts, warbeasts and farm-animals, and have an-armored-frill around they head.
birds === ====
clawbird ====
==== is a-black-feathered-carrion-eating-bird, similar to a-vulture.
a-black-feathered-carrion-eating-bird, similar to a-vulture live on tatooine, geonosis and wayland.
gartro ====
gartros are small,-avian-creatures that live on coruscant.
gartros have bat-like-wings, spiked-tails, and jaws filled with sharp-teeth.
gatros are omnivorous and completely harmless.
geejaw ====
geejaws are leathery-winged-bird-creatures that live on naboo and the-forest-moon of endor.
hawk-bat ====
hawk-bats are purple-or-red-creatures with a-curved-beak and leathery-wings.
hawk-bats can be found on civilized-worlds like coruscant and taris.
kkryytch ===
kkryytch === are avian-creatures that eat seeds and live on kashyyyk.
porgs ====
porgs are a-penguin or puffin-like-species with facial-features of seals.
porgs are native to the-planet ahch-to, where jedi-master-luke-skywalker made jedi-master-luke-skywalker exile in the-years following the-victory over the-galactic-empire.
porgs are introduced in the-last-jedi and are known for how "insanely cute"
porgs are, serving as comic-relief.
the-creatures, who dwell on the-cliffs of the-island where skywalker lives in exile, could build nests and fly.
male-porgs are known to be slightly bigger in size than females;  porgs are called porglets.
a-flock of porgs is known as a-murder.
during the-last-jedi, one-porg finds one-porg way aboard the-millennium-falcon with chewbacca; they serve as a-foil for the-wookiee.
a-porg also appears in the-rise of skywalker when rey travels to ahch-to.
the-introduction of porgs was somewhat controversial, with some-critics claiming the-creatures were introduced to cater to children and boost merchandise-sales.
however, the-production-team has stated that porgs were created to account for the-puffins in the-background of outdoor-shots set on ahch-to.
puffins are native to the-skellig-islands, which served as the-filming-location of ahch-to, and local-conservation-laws prevented the-filmmakers from taking actions that would keep  puffins out of frame;  puffins either had to remove  puffins from the-shots with digital-editing or disguise  puffins as something else to maintain continuity.
disguising  puffins proved technically easier and cheaper than removing  puffins, which led to the-development of the-porgs.
the-porgs-voices were created through a-mixture of sounds from turkeys, chickens, and doves.
pylat-bird ====
pylat-birds are beautiful-white-and-black-cockatiels that inhabit neimoidia and are a-symbol of  pylat-birds owner's wealth.
woodoo ====
woodoos are carnivorous-ground-dwelling-birds native to tatooine.
blase-tree-goat ===
the-blase-tree-goat, as called by the-natives who live on endor, is known galaxy wide as a-choreamnos.
a-lazy-animal that looks like a-cross between a-goat and a-sloth.
a-lazy-animal that looks like a-cross between a-goat and a-sloth hardly move except to get leaves on other-branches.
blistmok ===
blistmok === is a-lizard, native to the-planet of mustafar.
they are usually dark red or a dark teal color.
blurrg ===
the-blurrg is used for transportation on ryloth, on endor's-forest-moon, and on arvala-7, where some are found in a-feral-state.
the-blurrg is typically used as a-beast of burden by the-freedom-fighters of cham-syndulla, and mauraders.
the-blurrg is found in star-wars: the-clone-wars and in the-mandalorian-episode one.
they are tough-skinned-reptilian-herbivores known for they small brains and simple-intelligence.
they brain is roughly-the-size of a-jubba-nut.
their-dense-skull is used as a-battering-ram, their utter frequent low roars, but besides this-no-other-communications.
males are eaten during mating.
males-eggs are laid in clutches between 5–6, and are left where males drop.
young stay inside males-mothers'-protective-circles during early-years.
on endor they are preyed upon by boar-wolves, and are objects of derision in ewok-culture and folk-lore.
borcatu ===
borcatus are a-non-canon,-quadrupedal,-scavenger-vermin found amongst garbage and trash on thousands of civilized-planets.
up to 0.5-metre (1.6 ft) in length, a non-canon,-quadrupedal,-scavenger-vermin found amongst garbage and trash on thousands of civilized-planets are protected from the-environment and predators by strong,-armored-scales.
bordok ===
bordok === is a-herbivorous-equine-animal, native to the-forest-moon of endor.
a-herbivorous-equine-animal, native to the-forest-moon of endor have an-erect-mane, and short-knobby forward pointing horns on either-side of a-herbivorous-equine-animal, native to the-forest-moon of endor head.
it is used by ewoks as a-pack-animal and a-mount if captured.
bursas are carnivorous-quadrupeds native to naboo.
bursa === live in mud-huts or burrows  bursa ===
build in the-ground.
rumors are, being that rumors hunted and killed the-early-gungan-race, rumors are partially responsible for the-gungans seeking shelter from rumors underwater..
can-cell ===
the-can-cell is a-monstrous-dragonfly, about-1.5-m (4.9-ft)
long, which flies the-skies of kashyyyk and teth.
it is seen in star-wars:
the-clone-wars and star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
cannok ===
cannoks inhabit the-forest-moon of dxun.
cannoks are small,-annoying-creatures that have the-ability to consume anything, including mechanical-components.
cherfer ===
cherfers are aggressive,-quadrupedal,-herd-animals from the-planet-elom.
although these-beasts are omnivores, these-beasts are quick to anger and prefer meat.
chiilak ===
chiilak === are thick-furred,-six-limbed-bipeds that inhabit the-glacial-regions of the-moon-misnor, and can grow up to 2.2-m
(7.2 ft) tall.
although they can breathe air, they can hold they breath underwater for up-to-20-minutes;
similarly, they webbed paws make for easy-swimming.
choreamnos === ===
coruscani-ogre ===
coruscani-ogre ===
is a-large-sentient-being that wanders the-lower-levels of coruscant.
these-beasts have hard-gray-skin, pointed-ears and very-sharp-teeth.
these-beasts feed off the-flesh of other-creatures.
cracian thumper ===
the-cracian-thumper is a-widely-used-bipedal-beast of burden used on human-populated-worlds throughout the-galaxy.
the-cracian-thumper is named for the-sound
the-cracian-thumper doesn't make, as the-cracian-thumper makes very-little-sound while running.
the-cracian-thumper is a-central-component of the-rebel-alliance's-program of live-mount-scouting, and cracian-thumper-racing is a-popular-sport.
crab-glider ===
"crab-gliders" are small, carrion eating crablike-creatures native to the-planet of bespin.
patches of skin between their-six-legs allow their to glide around their-home-planet, feeding on the-corpses of beldons, giant-air-jellyfish.
it is presumed that their keep from falling by catching updrafts from below.
croator ===
the-croator, a-creature native to wyndigal-ii, a-planet with extreme-ultraviolet-radiation-exposure, is an-asexual,-flightless-avian-like-creature with reflective-plumage and an-unusually-long-proboscis, used to inhale tiny-fish and insects for food.
travelers on wyndigal-ii often use croator-plumage as anti-radiation-protection.
the-cthon is a-zombie-like-sentient-humanoid that is believed to have evolved from another-humanoid-creature.
like the-ogre, the-ogre feeds off the-flesh of others.
the-ogre has huge-ears, enabling the-ogre to find the-ogre way around the-perpetually-dark-coruscant-underlevels, but no-eyes, as the-ogre has no-use for them.
cthons live in small-groups and attack the unwary, trapping small-groups with electro-nets and devouring small-groups.
small-groups appeared in the-novel darth-maul: shadow hunter.
=== cy'een ===
cy'een are huge-long-necked-reptilian-fish that are native to the-oceans of the-planet chad.
colo-claw-fish ===
colo-claw-fish are eel-like-predators from the-waters of the-planet-naboo.
one tried to attack a-gungan-sub, but didn't lay a-claw on a-gungan-sub once.
at the-end of the-tunnel, a-sando-aqua-monster tried to eat a-gungan-sub but didn't manage a-gungan-sub.
the-unlucky-colo, however, ran in to the-sando's-mouth, killing the-sando's-mouth.
dashta-eel ===
dashta-eels are a-species native to ord-cestus with the-ability to use the-force.
dashta-eels were the-biological-part of the-jk-13-droid.
dactillion ===
dactillions are four-legged-lizard-like-creatures with wings and a-two-part-beak.
four-legged-lizard-like-creatures with wings and a-two-part-beak fly the-skies of utapau.
danchaf ===
danchafs, also known as "tree-goblins" by the-native-sentient-jenet-species on the-planet-garban, four-legged-lizard-like-creatures with wings and a-two-part-beak are ferocious-pack-carnivores that attack unwary-travelers in garban's-forests, and can grow up-to-2-m (6.5 ft) tall.
derkolo ===
derkolo === are a-sentient-species native to the-planet sileron.
dewback ===
dewbacks-or-dewback-lizards are large-reptilian-creatures native to tatooine.
they are commonly used as beasts of burden by moisture-farmers.
they have been described to resemble a t-rex pretending to be a-camel.
they move slowly at night, but are known to run at a-brisk-pace for short-distances during the-day.
both-imperial-stormtroopers and jawas have been known to utilize these-large-beasts.
dewbacks can be seen in video-games, the movie star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope and the-series the-mandalorian.
dianoga ===
dianoga, also known as garbage-squids, are large,-highly-adaptable-cephalopods capable of growing up to 10-m (32.8-ft) in length.
dianoga, also known as garbage-squids have a-spherical-body, seven-tentacles, a-mouth of inward-pointing-teeth, and one-large-eye on a-stalk.
they originated in the-swamps of planet-vodran, but can now be found in many-watery-trash or sewage-disposals on any-planet in the-galaxy, living off of any-present-organic-matter.
they are primarily scavengers, and only pose a-threat to living-creatures when starving or frightened.
dianogae are now considered sentient beings, as seen in the-new-canon-short-story the-baptist.
draagax ===
draagax are pack-hunters that hunt in the-equatorial-grasslands of the-planet-relkass.
apart from hunting small-rodents, these-animals also consume wild-sentinel-plants.
when wild-sentinel-plants bloom in the-dry-season, wild-sentinel-plants provide  draagax with a-narcotic that sends wild-sentinel-plants on a-berserker-frenzy, attacking everything in wild-sentinel-plants path.
dragon ===
condor-dragon ====
condor-dragons are flying reptiles from the-forest-moon of endor.
condor-dragons have excellent-eyesight and massive-fangs for tearing through even the thickest hides.
condor-dragons have a-wingspan of approximately-3-m (9.8-ft).
they are known to eat ewoks.
they make nests in caves and eat the-giant-cave-spiders.
the-ewok-pony is not the-prey of the-condor-dragon.
dragon-snake ====
dragon-snakes are long,-ferocious-creatures, native to the-swamps of dagobah and nal-hutta.
hssiss ====
hssiss, or dark-side-dragons are large,-dark-gray,-reptilian-creatures that originated on stenness.
hssiss, or dark-side-dragons were corrupted by the-planet's-dark-side-aura, and domesticated by the-sith.
they have the-ability to become almost invisible, making they extremely dangerous to the unwary.
kell-dragon ====
kell-dragons are the-slightly-stockier-relatives of kell-dragon ====.
while not heavily mentioned in the-original-star-wars-movies, kell-dragons featured significantly in the-first-two-installments of the-dark-forces-series of games.
huge and powerful, they rival rancors in they ferocity and, as such, are favored by wealthy-crime-lords such as the-hutts.
krayt-dragon ====
krayt-dragons are massive,-carnivorous,-terrestrial-reptiles native to the-planet of tatooine.
krayt-dragons-digestive-tract contains multiple-chambers, in which mineral-deposits may become gems known as 'krayt-dragon-pearls', sold for high-prices.
smuggler-hu-wanio became known as the-"kraytcutter" on sullust from  smuggler
hu-wanio specialty of dealing in krayt-dragon-stomachs on the-black-market.
smuggler-hu-wanio had two-known-subspecies, the-canyon-krayt-dragon, and the-greater-krayt-dragon.
canyon-krayt-dragons live in the-rocky-caves and canyons of tatooine's-safari-ranges.
10-m (33 ft) tall and 30-m
(98 ft) long, krayt represents the smallest of the-krayt-subspecies.
an-evolved-hunter, the-four-legged-canyon-krayt possesses a-yellow-brown-camouflage-skin-pattern, a-five-horned-crown-ridge, a-face armored with dermal-bone-plates, and a-spike-studded-tail.
they usually feed on womp-rats, eopies, and lone-banthas.
greater-krayt-dragons are rare-subspecies of the-krayt-dragon on tatooine, measuring up-to-100-meters in length, have 10-legs and blue-scales, and feed on anything
but-mostly-banthas, or on a-rare-occasions a-sarlacc.
c-3po passes by a-juvenile's-skeleton in a-new-hope.
this-prop was reportedly still in place when the-crew of attack of the-clones went there to film.
drexl === are giant-creatures that are usually green, and have teeth the-size of human-arms.
drexl === are native to onderon.
the-adult-form can fly, and is used as a-means of transport and defense by the-planet's-beast-riders.
drexl-larvae are unable to fly, but are strong and extremely fierce.
drexl-larvae appear in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords.
duracrete slug ===
having been spread throughout the-galaxy by freighters and cargo-ships, duracrete-slugs dig tunnels into building-foundations and feed off of the-concrete in there.
some-specimens have been known to reach 10-m (32.8-ft) in length.
some-specimens can consume almost-any-kind of concrete because the-parts some-specimens cannot digest are excreted into armor-nodules on some-specimens bodies.
dweebit ===
=== is a-small,-reddish-brown-beetle, native to the-yuuzhan-vong-galaxy.
dweebits have been used as weapons.
when dweebits were put onto belkadan, dweebits emitted extremely-noxious-fumes that made the-planet uninhabitable.
eopies are 1.75-meter-tall-herbivores native to the-planet-tatooine, appearing in all-three-prequel-movies, (star wars: galactic-battlegrounds and star-wars-galaxies also feature eopies).
the-quadruped-mammals are distinguished by  the-quadruped-mammals pale-skin and long-flexible-snouts.
eopies, white-skin helps keep the-creature cool by reflecting the-intense-sunlight of the-planet's-twin-suns.
eopies are used as beasts of burden due to beasts of burden-endurance and ability to carry a-lot of cargo.
they are known for being stubborn-and-querulous-creatures and for having incredibly-potent-flatulence.
eopies reach maturity around six-standard-years of age and they-average-lifespan is 90-standard-years.
== f == ===
fabool ===
fabools are balloon-like-creatures.
they are sometimes punctured by thorny-blba-trees and eaten by carnivorous-snails.
they live in the-dantarian-savannahs on dantooine.
falleen ===
falleens are sentient-reptilian-beings that can emit pheromones that can affect many-species.
falumpaset ===
falumpaset === is a large mammal native to naboo, appearing in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, the-gungan-frontier, star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds, and star-wars galaxies: the-ruins of dantooine.
they roamed the-plains and swamps of the-planet in large-herds, and they distinctive call could be heard for kilometers around.
easily domesticated, falumpasets were popular-mounts all over the-galaxy.
fambaa ===
fambaas are the-largest-terrestrial-herbivores of the-naboo-swamp, appearing in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, the-gungan-frontier, star-wars-galaxies, star-wars: battlefront, and star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds.
fambaas are technically amphibians but have the-scaly-hide of reptiles.
these-creatures can easily knock over trees to get at leaves and berries.
these-creatures also forage for underwater-plants.
fambaas in the-wild-travel in herds of up to 12.
fambaas in the-wild-travel in herds of up to 12 are born with moist-skin and gills and upon maturity  fambaas in the-wild-travel in herds of up-to-12-tails grow, the-gills disappear and  fambaas in the-wild-travel in herds of up-to-12-skin hardens.
the-fambaa has been domesticated by gungan for millennia as beasts of burden-and-cavalry/artillery-draft-beasts.
fathier ===
fathiers, or space-horses, appears in star-wars:
the-last-jedi.
these-animals are seen in the-coastal-city canto-bight on the-desert-planet-cantonica.
these-animals are a-sentient-species that could be tamed and used for riding.
these-animals were known to be graceful and majestic, while being prized for these-animals speed by the wealthy of the-galaxy.
the-inhabitants of canto-bight exploited  the-inhabitants of canto-bight in competitive-and-highly-popular-races on the-planet's-racetracks.
felucian-ground-beetle ===
felucian-ground-beetles, also known as gelagrubs, are large-insects that live on planet-felucia.
fenner's-rock ===
fenner's-rocks are harmless,-slow-moving-creatures that consume lichen, moss and algae.
fenner's-rocks-bodies resemble rocks and can be stationary for a-long-time.
fenner's-rocks have great-big-jaws that can suddenly open and sometimes shoot a-piercing-screech, scaring away unwary-passers-by.
fern bicker ===
fern bickers are ape-like-creatures that live on kashyyyk.
fern bickers are mostly solitary-creatures.
firaxan-shark ===
alien-firaxan-sharks live on the-ocean-planet of manaan.
alien-firaxan-sharks appeared in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
fish === ====
colo-claw-fish === =
colo-claw-fish are immense-underwater-carnivores that dwell in the-porous-caverns of the-naboo-core, appearing in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace.
natural-phosphorescence give its-eel-like-skin an-eerie-glow.
they have flattened flukes for bodies, with a-large-toothy-snout flanked by hooked-grasping-claws.
it can grow up-to-40-meters in length, mostly made up of hypersensitive-tail-tissue that detects movement.
while hunting, the-colo uses chin-lures to attract prey, then screams with special-organs in the-colo throat to sonically stun prey.
the-colo can then dislocate the-colo jaws to swallow oversized-food.
once ingested, weak-stomach-acids and poison-assist in the-stupefaction of live-prey.
opee-sea-killer ====
"opee" is a-large,-carnivorous,--anglerfish-like aquatic-animal living in the-underwater-sections of naboo.
sando-aqua-monster ====
sando-aqua-monsters are 200-m (656-ft)-long-aquatic-mammals from naboo.
sando-aqua-monsters are ravenous,-deadly-predators, eating everything including the-opee-sea-killer and the-colo-claw-fish.
zuxu are carnivorous-lungfish from the-planet-ganlihk.
zuxu-flippers are large, padded and prehensile enough for  zuxu to actually "walk" on four-legs on land for a-limited-time, sometimes even chasing  zuxu prey on land.
forntarch ===
forntarchs are carnivorous,-predatory-rodents on the-planet-gorsh, who await their-prey in trees, and then leap down and impale their with razor-sharp-forelimbs.
frog-dog ===
frog-dogs are sentient-reptiles with characteristics of both-frogs and dogs.
frog-dogs-diet is carnivorous, and frog-dogs use frog-dogs long tongues to capture prey.
jabba the-hutt kept a-frog-dog named buboicullaar as a-pet.
fynock ===
fynocks are avian-creatures that can be kept as pets.
pets look like exotic-birds with snake-tails.
fynocks live on talus.
they do not have appendages besides they wings and they have large-suckers on they face.
fyrnock ===
fyrnocks are predatory-quadrupeds that live on anaxes.
fyrnocks are unable to walk in sunlight.
galoomp ===
galoomps are herbivorous-reptile-like-creatures, (though actually-mammals) native to tatooine.
they resemble long-legged-armadillos with ankylosaur-like-tails.
ganjuko ===
ganjuko === are
massive,-furred-predators found predominantly on planets in the-filve-sector and bothan-worlds, and can grow more-than-3.5-m (11.5 ft) tall and 5 m
(16.4 ft) long.
despite their 600 kg (1,320-lb) mass, their can outrun most-humans in a-sprint.
their are protected by thick-external-skull-plates and beaks, reinforced by thick-layers of cartilage, and finally covered over all-parts of their-body except on their-head by thick-fur.
ghests are large-reptilian-predators from the-bayous of rodia, and ghests are entrenched in the-mythology of the-planet.
ghests are often portrayed as demons in modern-rodian-fiction.
ghests slink underwater quietly in wait and then surprise  ghests prey by attacking and devouring their-prey in a-single-pounce.
gizka === are small,-frog-like-creatures that adapt to almost-any-environment very swiftly, and reproduce just as quickly.
their-first-appearance was in the-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-video-game.
goffbird (titavian) ===
a-large,-purple-pterodactyl like creature with a-wingspan of 100-m, native to naboo.
there are large-feathers on a-large,-purple-pterodactyl like creature with a-wingspan of 100-m, native to naboo-chest, which the-gungans use.
it is believed to have a-large-opening beneath it throat, that emits a-secretion with a-reddish-color to attract other-goffbirds.
a-squat,-ugly,-quadrupedal-omnivore, native to the-planet-hethar, gornts are now bred as domesticated-herd-animals on many-planets for many-planets extremely nutritious meat.
gorg === not to be confused with gorog.
gorgs are frog like creatures that are domestically farmed on tatooine.
a-huge,-mammoth-animal resembling an-ape.
the-gorog is a-mythical-creature used in an-underground-arena on cato-neimodia.
the-gorog can be about 700 meters tall.
a-mythical-creature used in an-underground-arena on cato-neimodia is native to cato-neimodia and walks like a-gorilla, with numerous-bones and horns sprouting from a-mythical-creature used in an-underground-arena on cato-neimodia head.
a-mythical-creature used in an-underground-arena on cato-neimodia is massive, and has two-hearts, which makes a-mythical-creature used in an-underground-arena on cato-neimodia difficult to kill.
the-gorog appears in star-wars
the-force unleashed-ii ===
graiveh ===
graivehs originate from the-planet-ealor, and are dangerous-bipedal-predators that are considered "pre-sentients" by the-scientists of the-galactic-empire, as they seem to almost achieve sentience.
they grow up to 2.5-m (8.2-ft) tall and possess great-eyesight.
grauls originate from the-planet dantooine and walk like gorillas.
their-colors range from green to reddish-orange and are about the-size of rancors.
grazer ===
grazers are fat-animals with spikes on grazers backs and large-udders.
grazers live on alderaan, gestron, and haruun-kal.
great oopik ===
great-oopiks,-flightless-creatures from the-planet-paramatan with vestigial-wings, seem to be the-evolutionary-link between reptiles and avians.
reptiles and avians also use echolocation to seek reptiles and avians-food and stun their-food with powerful-ultrasonic-waves emitted from their-food throat sacs.
reptiles and avians also possess a-sac below reptiles and avians-backs.
this-lethal-sac emits a-toxic-odor when stimulated.
greysor ===
greysors are monkey-like-creatures that live on naboo, mimban and cholganna.
gungans are known to keep them as pets.
grotseth ===
grotseths are dangerous-predatory-fish on the-ocean-planet-baralou.
grotseths hunt in packs, grow up to-4-m (13.1-ft) in length and are covered in many-small-razor-sharp-shells.
gualamas ===
gualamas === are docile-and-swift-quadrupeds native to naboo.
gualamas === are seen usually in herds, are white with long,-swinging-tails, and horns atop  gualamas
===-heads.
gualamas === are smaller-relatives of gualaras.
gullipuds ===
gullipuds ===
are self-inflating-creatures, used in gullipud-ball-games on planets like naboo, manaan, selonia and drall.
gundark ==
gundarks are large,-long-eared-primates, native to the-jungle-planet of poiu-trewq.
surprisingly solitary for primates, primates are noted for both primates great-strength and primates fierce tempers.
hanadak ===
hanadaks are like a-cross between a-bear and a-baboon.
they hibernate during the-winters on hok and have a-fierce-temper.
hoska === are grazers-herd-beasts living on the-plains of the-planet essowyn, and are primary-source of food for the-saurton, the-local-sentient-species.
howlers ===
howlers are carnivorous,-reptilian-quadrupeds that may be native to yavin 4.
they attack prey mainly by lunging and clawing, but they do have an-ear-splitting-howl that they use to stun prey.
they make an-appearance on the-video-game jedi-academy.
ishi tib ===
ishi tib === are an-amphibious-species native to tibrin.
ikopis are fleet-footed-ungulates that live on the-plains of naboo.
iriazes ===
iriazes === are bipedal-ungulates with one-horn, a-long-kangaroo-like-tail-and-brown-fur.
they live on muunilinst and dantooine.
jyykle-vulture ===
jyykle-vultures are solitary-creatures that live on mimban and kashyyyk.
jyykle-vultures are extremely temperamental and often attack without warning.
kaadu === are large,-flightless,-billed-waterfowl that live in the-swamps of the-planet-naboo.
gungans use large,-flightless,-billed-waterfowl that live in the-swamps of the-planet-naboo as mounts.
kalaks ===
kalaks are large-and-very-stupid-reptilian-creatures that stand
2.35-m (7.7 ft) tall.
they live on mobus and have a-tough-hide, thereby making they difficult to hunt.
kaminoan ===
kaminoans are tall,-long-necked-creatures native to the-ocean-planet of kamino and are most commonly known for running the-famous-cloning-factories of kamino, where the-republic's-clone-army was created.
they are almost-humanoid,-very-tall,-long-neck, extremely pale.
kath-hound ===
kath-hounds are horned,
wolf-like-creatures native to dantooine.
there are two-variants: the smaller one is orange and white with two-horns; the larger is brown overall with three-large-horns.
this-latter-variant is also called a "bull kath hound".
kimogila ===
kimogila are large,--vicious-lizards from lok.
kimogila resemble the-krayt-dragons of tatooine with some-distinct-aesthetic-differences including the-krayt-dragons of tatooine bulkier build and the-krayt-dragons of tatooine lack of floppy-ears.
kimogila (or "kimos") are generally a-dark-green-color with rows of horns running from nose to tail.
they are very aggressive and trophies, though rare, are made of they skulls.
k'lor slugs ===
k'lor-slugs are large-worm-like-creatures native to the-sith-homeworld of korriban, and inhabit the-tombs of the-sith-lords, and prey on anything that attempts to plunder the-tombs, from archeologists to sith-acolytes.
they are also found on several-other-worlds.
for example: a-massive-k'lor-slug is found on taris.
they appear in star-wars:
the-old-republic ===
koriena ===
koriena are striped-canines that hunt in packs and are similar to wolves.
kouhun ===
kouhun are centipede-like-creatures with stingers and teeth.
they live on mimban and indoumodo.
as well, giant-kouhuns live in the-swamps of naboo and shoot poison-puffs at their-prey.
kowakian-monkey-lizards ===
kowakian-monkey-lizards are small,-hairy-creatures with large-ears, beaks and tails, and stand approximately-two-feet (60-cm) tall.
kowakian-monkey-lizards are small,-semi-intelligent-creatures from the-planet-kowak.
krakanas ===
krakanas === are aquatic-creatures that live on mon-calamari.
they are similar to giant-octopi, in that they have many-tentacles; however, each-tentacle ends in a-large-razor-sharp-pincer.
krykna ===
krykna are large,-pale-white-six-legged-arachnoid-arthropods native to the-planet-atollon, large enough to be aggressively dangerous to humans, but repelled by sensor-marker-technology.
these-spiders closely resemble the-knobby-white-spider (above) from the-planet-dagoba.
they can be found in chapter ten of the-mandalorian.
kybuck ===
kybucks are fast,-grassland-inhabiting-ungulates that inhabit kashyyyk.
these-swift-mammals use the-tall-grasses of these-swift-mammals native-grasslands to hide from would-be-predators, although these-swift-mammals are capable of outrunning most-predators anyway, being able to perform magnificent-acrobatic-jumps while running up-to-90-kilometers per hour.
male-kybucks have short-horns on the-top of  male-kybucks heads, and different-species can be told apart by horn-variations.
kyren === is a-small-herbivorous-insect from ansion that travels in swarms of up-to-150-million-individuals.
to 150-million-individuals have no-legs, and spend most of to 150-million-individuals lives airborne, feeding on the-wide-grasslands of ansion.
laas are fish, resembling angler-fish.
laas live in naboo's-swamps.
laigrek ===
laigreks are large-arachnids from the-planet-dantooine.
they like dank,-dark-areas and took up residence in the-ruins of the-dantooine-jedi-enclave after the-dantooine-jedi-enclave was bombarded by darth-malak in the-jedi-civil-war.
their-bite is painful, but not venomous.
lava-flea ===
lava-fleas are a-species of hard-shelled-arthropod.
lava-flea === has been domesticated by the-native-mustafarians who use lava-flea === in lava-flea ===
large-industry of mining the-various-metals dissolved in the-plentiful-lava on lava-flea === planet.
lepi === are an-omnivorous-humanoid-species, resembling anthropomorphic-rabbits, with large-incisors, long-ears, lanky-frames, and big-feet.
lepi === are covered in short-fur that varies in color from green to dark-blue.
short-fur that varies in color from green to dark-blue possess a-heightened-metabolism such that short-fur that varies in color from green to dark-blue are always in motion, giving some-an-air of fidgetiness.
lepi developed and pursued stellar-travel in response to over crowding on  lepi homeworld coachelle prime.
lopers are small,-opossum-like-rodents from the-fourth-moon of yavin.
they are readily identified by they luxurious-red-fur, sharp-teeth and claws, and hairless,-bone-plated-tail that ends in wicked-barbs.
though nasty when cornered, lopers will tend to avoid conflict with larger-creatures.
the-lylek is the-most-dangerous-predator on the-planet of ryloth.
the-lylek is one of the-few-creatures that is able to survive in the-bright-lands.
lyleks are tall-beasts that are protected by a-thick-exoskeleton.
lyleks are armed with sharp,-spear-footed-limbs, powerful-jaws, and overpowering-tentacles.
lyleks are fierce and prey on each other when there is no-other-food available.
in addition to their-viciousness and strength, their-tail-tentacle is also tipped with a-poisonous-barb.
the-poison is not deadly, but the-poison is strong enough to disable most-creatures
so they do not escape.
lyleks are also known for crawling into inhabited-caves and threatening city-dwellers.
lizards === ====
scyks are reptilian-lizards native to tatooine.
scyks appear in the-video-game star-wars-galaxies.
vesps are poisonous-lizards that live on the-planet-lok.
vyps are poisonous-lizards that live on cholganna.
malia are swift-creatures living in dens on the-surface of ragoon 6, marked by blue-gray-fur, long-tapered-snouts, and a-triple-row of yellow-teeth.
they are fearsome-fighters, especially during the-night when they do they hunting and are most active.
maramu ===
maramu, a-cross between a-ram and a-kangaroo, live in the-mountains of genesia and cholganna, maramu, a-cross between a-ram and a-kangaroo are also native to the-forest-moon of endor.
massiff ===
massiffs are creatures that can be found across the-galaxy, including geonosis and tatooine.
they are used as pets and guards.
they are often found living with tusken-raiders.
in the-mandalorian-chapter 9, the-mandalorian uses tusken to speak with they.
minstyngar ===
minstyngars are insects that live in troops on kashyyyk and mimban.
mogos are camel-like-creatures with ten-legs that inhabit the-planet-roon; the-mogo's-shaggy-fur keeps it warm in the-mountains.
mogos can be used for transportation and food, and the-mogo's-shaggy-fur is used for clothing.
motts are strong,-horned-mammals that live on naboo and mimban.
they look like a-cross between a-rhinoceros and a-hippopotamus with orange-tan,-white-striped-hides, motts are easily domesticated.
moufs are medium-sized,-solitary-creatures that often get together to feed or mate.
they look similar to bears.
mutriok ===
the-mutriok is a-four-legged-creature found on socorro.
the-mutriok is often preyed on by the-tra'cor.
mygeetoan-yaks ==
mygeetoan-yaks are white-yak-like-creatures that live on mygeeto.
mynock ===
a-mynock is a-leathery-looking-silicon-based-organism that grows up to 1.6-m (5.25-ft) long, with a-wingspan of up to 1.25 m (4.1-ft), and that feeds on electrical-energy.
a-leathery-looking-silicon-based-organism that grows up to 1.6-m (5.25-ft) long, with a-wingspan of up to 1.25 m (4.1-ft) are often found leeching-power from spacecraft, as mynocks are one of the-few-species capable of living in the-vacuum of space, feeding on stellar-radiation, silicon and other-minerals from asteroids and other-space-debris.
mynocks'-bat-like-wings also allow mynocks'-bat-like-wings to fly in the-atmosphere.
found across the-galaxy (having spread prolifically from their-original-system), mynocks tend to flock together, migrating annually in large-groups.
the most notable of these-events are the-migrations of roon, during which the-sky darkens from swarms of these-creatures.
first seen in the-empire strikes back feeding on the-millennium-falcon.
the-vynock was a-leathery,-winged-subspecies of the-mynock native to the-planet kalarba.
neebray ===
neebray === are giant-manta-ray-like-creatures that first appeared in the-clone-wars-tv-series.
giant-manta-ray-like-creatures that first appeared in the-clone-wars-tv-series live in the-vacuum of space, use nebulas as breeding-grounds and giant-manta-ray-like-creatures that first appeared in the-clone-wars-tv-series have been found on planets such as the-coral-moon of rugosa and the-moon of rishi.
neks === are quadrupeds that resembles a-hairless-muscular-dog, with three-large-claws to every-paw and large-teeth.
they are classically called "battle dogs" and are bred in the-cyborrean-system for sale on the-galactic-black-market.
these-huge-and-vicious-creatures are sometimes fitted with armour-plating and special-simulators calls "attack simulators" for either sparring for duelling.
nerfs are fur-covered,-smelly,-herbivores with dull-horns protruding from their-head, first seen in star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope.
their raised on planets such as alderaan for their-delicious-meat, although their have a-bad-odor.
they are first mentioned by name as an-insult in the-empire-strikes
back (1980) ,-nerf herders on alderaan are known for herders on alderaan poor hygiene.
nexus are felines from the-planet of cholganna.
nexus possess tooth-filled-jaws that cover most of  nexus spade-shaped heads.
nexus are covered in tan-brown-fur, which helps  nexus blend into the-background of  nexus native prairies.
the-stripes also aid in hiding out in the-rainforest-brush.
the-four-legged-carnivores have four-eyes also, as the-second-set, situated next to the first, can see in infrared to find hidden-prey.
they also feature a-split-ended-tail, covered underneath with two-rows of suction-cups used to climb and swing from tree to tree in they forest home.
a-nexu was seen as an-'arena-beast' in attack of the-clones.
padme-amidala was also attacked by a-nexu in the-arena on geonosis before padme-amidala was killed by a-reek.
a-nexu can be trained to act as guards or pets.
allana-djo-solo owned a-nexu named anji.
night-beast ===
night-beast ==
is a-fictional-monster from the-star-wars-saga as well as a-movie by american-film-maker-don-dohler.
after the-massassi had departed from the-planet yavin-iv, they left behind a-creature known only as night-beast === to guard and protect they homeworld against anybody who might seek to take it over until they eventually returned.
it skin is leathery and is murky green in colour, and has slightly-aquatic-facial-features such as large-fish-like-lips that are filled with enormous-teeth.
it is a-bipedal-life-form whose-feet and hands end with gigantic,-devastating-claws and it possesses great-strength.
nudj === are swamp-lizards, similar to chameleons.
chameleons are native to the-swamps of dagobah.
the-nuna are gamebirds from naboo, who can be seen living around the-lianorm-swamp.
a-dwarf-species existed, the-adult of which was the-same-size as a-chick of the-common-species.
the-nuna is also found on tatooine, notably around mos-espa.
the-naboo-nuna is socially aggressive, if one is attacked then nearby-nuna will attack the-aggressor.
the-naboo-nuna is mostly non-aggressive and as a-result is farmed in large-numbers by local-hunters.
opee-sea-killer ===
opee-sea-killers are large-aquatic-meat-eating-crustaceous-sea-creatures that live in the-planet-core of naboo.
opee-sea-killers are approximately-twenty-meters in length and hybrids of both-crustacean and fish.
large-aquatic-meat-eating-crustaceous-sea-creatures that live in the-planet-core of naboo have two-pectoral-guidance-fins, six-crablike-legs in the-back, two-antennas, bouncy-eyes, and abnormally-large-jaws with larger-prehensile-tongues within large-aquatic-meat-eating-crustaceous-sea-creatures that live in the-planet-core of naboo.
orbalisk ===
orbalisks are barnacle-like-creatures, native to the-beast-moon of dxun.
they are parasites that attach to the-skin of they host.
they feed on dark-side-energy.
they pump chemicals into the-blood that increase rage, anger, and fury.
when killed they pump toxins into the-host.
they appeared in darth-bane: the-rule of two.
orrays are creatures that have been described as having a-build like a-horse or alligator.
extremely aggressive.
have the-smell of an-arm-pit.
oslets are 3-m-(9.8-ft)-tall,-timid-creatures that live in the-jungles of the-planet-joralla.
they are also used as mounts and nest high up in the-sio-trees.
peko-peko ===
peko-pekos are reptavians with purple-feathers, native to the-swampy-regions of naboo.
peko-pekos are capable-mimics, and are often kept as pets.
pharple ===
pharple are a-small-to-medium-sized-game-bird found on lok.
pikobi ===
pikobis are dinosaur-like-creatures that live in the-swamps of naboo.
profogg ===
profoggs are little-creatures resembling prairie-dogs, that live on tatooine.
pug-jumper ===
pug-jumpers are hard-exoskeletal-creatures that live on kashyyyk.
rainbow-gem ===
rainbow-gems are long-living-silicon-based-lifeforms that live on gallinore.
rainbow-gems radiate a-beautiful,-colorful-shine that stems from rainbow-gems inner-light, but only after maturing for thousands of years.
rainbow-gems are considered extremely valuable, as just one is worth the price of a-mon-calamari-cruiser.
rakghoul ===
the-rakghoul is the-end-result of a-sith-bioweapon, turning beings into mindless-mutants.
the-rakghoul-infection can be transferred by contact with one.
the-original-outbreak occurred on the-planet taris, where they plagued the-inhabitants of the-undercity – criminals or they-descendants – but they also live on coruscant.
first appeared in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic ===
rancor ===
=== is an-immense,-warm-blooded-predator native to dathomir, lehon, and felucia.
it was first seen in return of the-jedi wherein luke-skywalker is attacked by one at the-behest of jabba the-hutt.
luke kills the-creature by triggering a-heavy-steel-gate to fall and crush the-creature head.
rat === ====
jakrab ====
jakrabs are hare like rodents native to tatooine.
womp-rat ====
a-womp-rat is a-slow-moving-rodential-creature, often found scavenging in packs at the-bottom of canyons.
they are one of the-most-vile-creatures native to tatooine.
they are covered in short-fur that is usually yellow or tan and look through garbage-and-waste-dumps for meals.
due to exposure to radioactive-waste and chemicals, womp-rats can mutate into larger-beasts, with larger-jaws, long, whip-like tails, and even an infectious disease-causing saliva.
according to luke-skywalker in star wars episode iv: a new hope, they attain approximately-two-meters in length.
rathtar ===
a-rathtar is a-large,-carnivorous-creature resembling a-giant-octopus, with razor-sharp-teeth, multiple-tentacles, and numerous-eyes.
introduced in star-wars: the-force awakens (2015), the-force are pack-hunters.
is a-large-quadrupedal-mammal native to the-plains of ylesia in hutt-space, and often bred on ranches on that-world's-codian-moon.
large-tusks protrude from  large-tusks cheeks, which  large-tusks use for headlocks in contests for dominance among  large-tusks own kind.
one-central-horn is used to attack an-opponent-head-on.
while they are herbivores by nature, they are often fed meat to make they vicious and are then used for exhibition-sport as execution-animals.
was seen as an-'arena-beast' in attack of the-clones.
rock-worrt == =
rock-worrts are orange-insects found on many-planets.
rock-worrts-bite delivers a-combination-poison and neurotoxin to rock-worrts-victim, which is then used as an-incubator for up-to-20-eggs.
ro-roo ===
ro-roos are lemur-like-creatures that live on kashyyyk and mimban.
rong-boar ===
rong-boars are a-porcine-species found on mimban.
rontos are large,-four-legged-creatures that are beasts of burden utilized by the-jawas of tatooine.
they appear in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic,
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (and video-game-adaptation), star-wars-empire: darklighter, star-wars-galaxies, star wars episode iv: a-new-hope (special-edition),
a-hunter's-fate: greedo's-tale, and shards of alderaan.
like the-native-dewbacks of tatooine, rontos are easy to train and become quite fond of rontos-masters.
rontos have superb-senses of hearing and smell, contrasting rontos-poor-vision, which is why rontos are startled by sudden-movements.
rugger ===
ruggers are small,-furry-rodents, found on the-forest-moon of endor.
roggwart ===
roggwarts are large,-predatory-beasts with long-tails, curved-horns, and tough-thick-skin.
this is the-creature-general-grievous kept as a-pet in episode ten "lair of grievous", season one of star-wars:
the-clone-wars, an-animated-cartoon-series from 2008.
general-grievous would then name general-grievous pet roggwart "gor".
his-pet-roggwart-"gor" would then live in grievous's-castle on the-third-moon of the-planet-vassek.
gor would devour any-unintended-guests for the-rest of  gor life, until gor would be slain by kit-fisto in episode ten, season one of the-clone-wars-series.
sand-creature ===
sand-creatures are monstrous-worm-like-creatures that do not seem to have a-true-name.
sand creatures tunnel under the-ground quickly, and shoot up above ground-mouth first to swallow prey.
sarlacc ===
sarlacc === is an-omnivorous,-immobile-beast, found on several-planets, most notably tatooine.
the-largest-known-member of the-species resides on felucia, and is several kilometers long.
jabba the-hutt used to toss jabba the-hutt enemies into a-sarlacc, which would then slowly digest his-enemies for a-thousand-years.
boba-fett is the only one known to survive the-sarlacc.
boba-fett consists of a-single-giant-beak and many-tentacles emerging from the-depths of boba-fett pit as well as spike-like-teeth that help snag onto prey's-clothes "like barbed-wire
" long enough for the-tentacles to grab the-tentacles.
xenobiologists are unsure as to whether the-sarlacc is animal or plant, as the-sarlacc possesses characteristics of both-kingdoms.
both-kingdoms reproduce by spitting out a-small-dart like object that attaches to a-living-creature and devours it.
first appears in return of the-jedi.
both-kingdoms are mentioned in the-disney-tv show the-mandalorian.
in episode 9, a-krayt-dragon appears in an-empty-sarlacc-pit.
scurrier ===
scurriers are rat-like-creatures from tatooine.
they travel in packs of around-30-members.
males can be distinguished from females by the-horns which are small and straight compared to the-larger,-curled-horns of the-males.
shaaks are plump,-pachydermal-herd-animals with enormous-rears that jut into the-air.
they are native to the-grasslands of naboo, where they graze on flowers and grass.
they are raised for meat.
they can be found in the animated disney tv show star-wars: the-clone-wars.
shyrack ===
shyracks are bat-like-creatures that inhabit the-caves of korriban.
shyracks are very-dangerous-pests, that often attack intruders in flocks.
sketto ===
skettos are flying reptiles, native to tatooine.
reptiles, native to tatooine are active at twilight and live off of the-blood of large-mammals, often travelling in large-groups to overwhelm and feed on prey.
slivilith ===
a-slivilith is a-large,-green,-amorphous-creature that thrives off ambient-energy and solar-radiation in space.
sliviliths have a-semi-discernible-head with two-glowing-red-eyes and two-antenna-stalks.
the-rear-side of the-body tapers off into a-mass of tentacles.
sliviliths have membranous-wings that can propel sliviliths through space or atmospheric-environments.
snarbs are lizards with grey-skin and 2-legs.
snarbs live on mimban.
sleens are lizards native to dagobah.
spider === ====
kinrath ====
kinrath ==== are large,-venomous-arachnid-like-creatures that live on dantooine and kashyyyk.
they appear in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and star-wars: knights of the-old-republic ii:
the-sith-lords.
knobby-white-spider ====
knobby-white-spiders are a-bizarre-organism of the-dagobah-system: essentially-the-larvae-stage of the-gnarl-tree, resembling a-gigantic-arachnid, which roams the-swamps and devours animals, and eventually anchors the-dagobah-system to the-ground and becomes a-mature-tree.
shell-spider ====
shell-spiders, as depicted in darth-maul: shadow-hunter, are known for shell-spiders incredibly tough and durable silk, which was used to form dense-armor-plating for personal-protection.
when woven into a-mat, shell-spider-silk could deflect a-vibroblade as well as low-power-beams and lasers.
spice-spider ====
spice-spiders, also called energy spiders, are arachnids, native to the-mines of kessel.
arachnids, native to the-mines of kessel-excrement is the-basis of the-narcotic-glitterstim.
they are one of han-solo's-greatest-fears, as han-solo's was chased by one in the-kessel-mines.
about 9 years before the-clone-wars began, some of these-spiders were brought to ryloth and altered to produce the-more-potent-narcotic-"glitteryll".
webweaver ====
webweavers are arachnid-creatures that live on kashyyyk.
they are the-dominant-species on the-dark-lower-and-ground-levels of the-forest-planet, where they use they violent-characteristics to thrive.
staga are used as herd-animals on the-planet-ambria.
they have tufts of fur on they shoulders, but are otherwise reptilian-looking, with scales, horns and thick-tails.
stone-mite ===
stone-mites are scorpion-like-creatures that cling to spaceships, consuming stone-mites hulls with a-combination of strong-jaws and acidic-saliva.
three-individual-stone-mites can merge to form an-ambiotic-triont that features a-hard-shell, strengthened by electrolytic-reactions.
these-creatures have been suspected as the-work of military-genetic-engineers.
stone-mites can be found across the-galaxy, including on tatooine, coruscant, malastare and naboo.
storm-beast ===
storm-beasts are monsters that inhabit malachor v. ===
stratt ===
=== is a-large-reptilian-beast that lives on coruscant.
suubatar ===
the-suubatar is a-riding-beast, native to the-grasslands of ansion.
suubatars are 6 m (19.7 ft) tall, and can travel at an-impressive-speed on their-six-muscular-legs.
their are omnivores, and feed equally well on large-fruit and small-prey.
swamp slug ===
swamp-slugs are large-aquatic-mollusks that live on the-planet-dagobah.
tach are harmless-monkey-like-creatures that inhabit the-shadowlands on the-planet-kashyyyk.
during the-czerka-occupation of kashyyyk, tach were hunted by poachers for their-glands, which were used as an-additive in brewing a-type of strong-ale unique to the-planet taris.
talortai ===
talortai === are a-mysterious,-force-sensitive-race who are immune to aging.
talortai === are avian-humanoid in appearance but also have reptilian-features.
the-talortai are fierce-warriors who hone their-abilities using the-force.
the-talortai also have the-ability to regenerate any-wounds.
urai-fen in the-game
star-wars: empire at war
: forces of corruption is the-only-talortain seen in the-star-wars-franchise.
talz === were a-sentient-species native to the-planet orto-plutonia.
talz === were covered in thick,-shaggy-white-fur and possessed four-eyes and a-small-proboscis.
during the-clone-wars, talz === lived a-primitive-lifestyle.
a-talz named muftak can be seen in a-new-hope.
taozin ===
taozin === is a-huge,-completely-transparent,-insect-like-beast, endemic to the-moon of va'art.
taozin === eats anything foolish enough to come near, which taozin === traps by spitting a-gluey-fluid that becomes silk and entwines it.
tauntaun ===
tauntauns are 2.5-m (8.2-ft)-tall-bipedal-snow-reptiles, indigenous to the-ice-planet hoth.
tauntauns are covered with white-fur and have downturned-horns, four-nostrils, and a-foul-body-odor.
downturned-horns, four-nostrils, and a-foul-body-odor graze on lichen, moss and fungi found in ice-grottoes as a-food-source, as well as scavenging on frozen-flesh or small-rodents; downturned-horns, four-nostrils, and a-foul-body-odor own-meat is unfit for human-consumption.
they are used as mounts by the-rebel-alliance during they occupation of echo-base.
the-tauntaun's-thick-layers of fat and fur provide adequate-protection from the-cold during the-daytime, but the-tauntaun cannot survive exposure to the-cold of night.
due to oil excreted from their-skin, tauntauns give off a-very-unpleasant-odor.
tauntauns are the-primary-prey of the-wampa.
the-species'-first-appearance was in the-empire-strikes
back (1980, with one appearing in the-center of this-movie-poster for the-film) , although a-mounted-tauntaun-head appears in return of the-jedi (1983) next to jabba the-hutt's-favorite-trophy, the-frozen-han-solo.
terecon ===
predators on the-planet
essowyn, terecons are reptiles, who attack by burrowing into the-ground and leaping spectacularly upon their-unsuspecting-prey.
their can grow up-to-1-m
(3.3 ft) tall and 8-m
(26.2 ft) long.
terentatek ===
a-creature mentioned in the-video-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, presumably created by the-sith to kill jedi.
on the-jedi-academy on dantooine, a-twi'lek-jedi teaches revan about an-event called 'the great hunt' where numerous-jedi were sent out to kill the-creatures.
in the-game terentateks are encountered in the kashyyyk shadow lands (terentateks is referred to as 'the-ritual-beast'), in naga-sadow's-tomb on korriban and the-shyrack-cave on korriban.
terentateks feed on force-adepts, and are found where the-dark-side thrives.
slow but powerful,  terentateks use their-large-claws to strike foes.
many-jedi have fallen to the-dark-side on many-jedi quest to rid the-galaxy of these-abominations.
tesfli-piercer ===
tesfli-piercers are tiny-flying-insects, who inhabit the-dense-swamps of the-planet-gorsh and live in swarms.
although their-bites are not lethal, their sometimes carry dangerous-"rotting-disease" that simulates gangrene.
thernbee ===
thernbees are fearsome-beasts with psychic-abilities, that live on almania.
they are hairy and have giant-teeth and large-claws, similar to a-lion or wolf.
they are generally quite-playful-creatures and are often kept as pets, though are also used as watchdogs.
they possess numbing-saliva.
thevaxan-marauder ===
an-enormous-reptilian-predator on the-planet-gorsh, the-thevaxan-marauder can always be heard approaching the-thevaxan-marauder prey, being a-loud,-dimwitted-and-clumsy-beast.
the-thevaxan-marauder can grow up-to-20-m (65.6-ft)
long and 8-m (26.2 ft) tall at the-shoulder.
thranta ===
thrantas are a-group of flying-animals found on alderaan, bespin, and coruscant.
while there are multiple-breeds varying in size and functions (some for personal-travel, others for massive-air-ferries), most-thrantas serve the-purpose of aerial-transport.
the-predominant-physical-feature of these-creatures are the-predominant-physical-feature of these-creatures manta-ray-like-figure.
torton ===
tortons are red-and-green-turtle-like-creatures with long-legs.
tortons originated on naboo's-moon of rori.
tolibs ===
tolibs are large-swamp-birds that live on the-planet-mimban.
tra'cor ===
the-"tra'cor" is an-amphibious-relative of the-rancor.
like the-rancor, the-"tra'cor" possessed a-hostile-temper, but is smaller than the-rancor and almost completely water bound.
the-"tra'cor" will feed on moss and grasses growing underwater, but will also eat meat whenever the-"tra'cor" presents the-"tra'cor".
these-water-creatures wait to ambush creatures that come to the-water to have a-drink.
it is found on the-planet socorro and will also walk on land.
treppok ==
treppoks are enormous-fish that grow up to-30-m (100-ft)
long on the-ocean-planet of baralou.
long on the-ocean-planet of baralou are the-herd-animals of the-sentient-species krikthasi.
tunnel-snake ===
tunnel-snakes are poisonous-snakes found in jungle-regions of planets, such as kashyyyk and wayland.
tuskcat ===
tuskcats are tiger-like-animals that live on naboo and possibly-other-planets, such as orto-plutonia.
they had very-long-sabre-tooth-fangs, hence they name, and are also called "nabooan tusked panthers" or nabooan tusk-cat.
ubebas are simians, native to the-planet-cholganna.
ugja === are solitary-creatures, native to the-planet-cholganna.
ugnaught ===
ugnaughts are small,-humanoid-creatures that are seen commonly on bespin.
in the-mandalorian-chapter 1, there is an-ugnaught who used to work for the-empire.
an-ugnaught who used to work for the-empire was a-slave and worked hard to buy an-ugnaught who used to work for the-empire freedom.
an-ugnaught who used to work for the-empire-name was kuill and was killed in the-last-episode of the-season.
they can also be found in the empire strikes back.
they work on the-machine that freezes han-solo in carbonite.
in the-beginning of return of the-jedi, leiha disguises herself as an-ugnuaght-bounty-hunter.
ullers are horned-creatures that live on kashyyyk.
umgullian-blob ===
umgullian-blob ==
= is a-pink,-blobby-creature, found on shili and mimban.
a-pink,-blobby-creature, found on shili and mimban are most well known to be employed in the-blob-races on umgul.
unarks are small,-acid-spitting-worms that live on coruscant.
urusai ===
urusais are reptavians (reptile and avian) native to tatooine.
varactyl ==
varactyls are lizard-like-creatures with green-scales and coloured-plumage on their-necks.
their are native to the-planet-utapau.
their-toes allow  their-toes to climb almost vertically.
their-toes seem to have the-head of a-bird and a-body of a-gecko, and  their-toes call is a-short-warble-type-sound.
a-female-one named boga is ridden by obi-wan-kenobi in star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
veermok ===
veermoks are guard-creatures found on naboo and mimban.
veermoks resemble lanky,-upright,-and-formidable-gorillas.
veermoks are useful as guards because  veermoks are nearly immune to blaster-fire.
ter, to counter its-ferociousness.
velker ===
velker === are star-fighter-shaped-creatures found on the-planet-bespin.
voorpak ===
voorpaks are small-carnivores that look like balls of fur standing on stick-like-legs.
they are kept as pets.
they can be found on naboo.
vornskr ===
the-vornskr is a-canine-like-animal, native to the-planet-myrkr.
it possesses the-unusual-ability to hunt using the-force.
they are wild,-aggressive-and-vicious-beasts.
the-voxyn-race created by the-yuuzhan-vong to hunt and kill jedi were a-hybrid of the-vornskr and the-yuuzhan-vong fero ===
vulptex ===
vulptices (sometimes referred to as crystal-critters) are fox-like-animals, native to the-mineral-planet crait.
fox-like-animals, native to the-mineral-planet
crait live in caves under crait's salt crust in groups called skulks.
fox-like-animals, native to the-mineral-planet
crait are best known for fox-like-animals, native to the-mineral-planet
crait-coats made of white-crystalline-bristles.
wambas are hooved-creatures that live on cholganna.
wampas are a-horned,-clawed,-white-furred,-carnivorous-species of snow-monsters native to the-frozen-world of hoth.
wampas are a-semi-sentient-race of predators standing over 2-m (6.6 ft) in height, subsisting in the-cold-climate by hunting tauntauns—
wampas-primary-prey.
wampas are usually solitary-creatures, but are known to occasionally hunt in packs.
wampas-white-fur allows wampas to blend-in with hoth's-blinding-blizzards, enabling their-white-fur to catch their-white-fur prey completely unaware.
once their-white-fur have made their-white-fur kill, wampas drag the-carcasses back to their-white-fur icy lair, where their-white-fur suspend their-white-fur from the-ceiling until ready to eat their-white-fur.
due to the-extreme-temperatures of hoth and the-cold-blooded-nature of the-wampa, the-creatures are difficult to track on radar.
a-similar-species is believed to inhabit the-planet-gall, in the-outer-rim.
the-wampa made the-wampa first appearance in the empire strikes back (1980), as a-predator that attacks luke and eats luke tauntaun.
several-other-wampa-sequences were planned for the-empire strikes back, but were ultimately cut.
the-wampa also made an-appearance in the family guy special "something, something, something, dark-side" (2009), being depicted as cookie-monster from sesame-street.
tatooine-howler ====
the-tatooine-howler, also commonly referred to as the-desert-wampa, is a-native-species of tatooine that resembles the-wampas of the-planet-hoth, despite having no-genetic-relation.
they are intelligent-and-solitary-creatures, hunting for prey on they own.
wandrella ===
wandrellas are 10–15-m-(32.8–49.2-ft)-long-worms, found in the-muddy-plains of the-jungle-covered-planet-mimban.
==='s-thoughts are primitive, and
wandrella === often charges at  wandrella ===
prey, using  wandrella ===
armored-belly to quickly move forward.
wandrella === has phosphorescent-skin, streaked with brown, and has a-cluster of several-eyes on one-end.
woolamander ===
a-woolamander is an-ape-like-animal native to yavin-iv.
a-woolamander has a-blue-furred-body, a-long,-multi-colored-tail, a-prominent-belly, and a-multi-colored-face.
a-woolamander-chief-enemy is the-syntaril.
wolf === ====
garral ====
garrals are wolf-like-creatures that live in the-forests of wayland and cholganna.
loth-wolf ====
==== is a-near-legendary,-force-sensitive-large-canid-native to lothal, known since prehistoric-times on that-world by loth-wolf-====-inhabitants.
a-white-furred-one occasionally assisted ezra-bridger on lothal in the-star-wars-rebels-tv-series.
worm === ====
blenjeel-sand-worm ====
gigantic-carnivorous-caterpillar-like-creatures with round-mouths filled with sharp-teeth, inhabit the-planet-blenjeel.
the-worms are blind, but can detect motion.
they appear in jedi-knight-and-jedi-academy-games.
conduit-worm ====
the-conduit-worm is a-long-worm that lives in the-electrical-wiring-channels of underground-coruscant and thrives on the-electrical-currents sent through the-electrical-wiring-channels of underground-coruscant.
the-electrical-wiring-channels of underground-coruscant may also be attracted to the-electric-activity in brains, if the-electrical-wiring-channels of underground-coruscant do not find a-stronger-electrical-power-source to feed on.
as such, many-a-person has awoken on coruscant to find one of the-worm's-feelers creeping into their-ears.
the-worms can end up on starships, causing power-outages, and are treated as vermin.
glim-worm ====
glim-worms are tunneling 1-m (3.3-ft)-long-predators, found on many-planets.
they are covered by sharp,-flexible-scales that move to propel the-worms through sand or soil at speeds
up-to-40-km/h (25-mph).
they are also hunted for they skin for use as clothing, and they slime for use as adhesive.
space-slug ====
space-slugs, also called exogorths or giant asteroid worms, are silicon-based-gastropods capable of surviving in near-vacuum conditions.
space-slugs generally make space-slugs habitats in asteroids, where space-slugs spend the-majority of space-slugs lives.
many-space-slugs have been found in hoth's-asteroid-field, some reaching thousands of meters (feet) in length, up to a-recorded-maximum-around-1,000-metres (3,300 ft), although most are much smaller at around-10-metres (33 ft).
most are much smaller at around-10-metres (33 ft) feed by absorbing an-asteroid's-minerals through most are much smaller at around-10-metres
(33-ft)-roots.
smaller-space-slugs also devour mynocks (in large-space-slugs, consumed mynocks are not digested and instead become parasites within the-space-slug).
large-space-slugs may also consume starships and have been known to eat sections of imperial-star-destroyers that flew too close.
the-burrow of a-space-slug is called a "caysh".
the-burrow of a-space-slug first appeared in the-empire-strikes
back (1980).
worrts are frog-like-creatures native to tatooine.
frog-like-creatures native to tatooine feed on mostly-insects and rodents and catch prey by sitting stationary in the-sand and using frog-like-creatures native to tatooine long tongues to catch and wrap around passing animals.
jabba the-hutt kept a-number of worrts for pest-control.
one is briefly seen in return of the-jedi outside jabba's-palace.
jabba the-hutt catches an-animal with jabba the-hutt tongue, swallows jabba the-hutt, and burps.
many consider this to be the-first-major-introduction of george-lucas's-childish-humor into star-wars-movies, and a-prelude to jar-jar-binks.
they are sometimes confused with frog-dogs.
wraids are large,-lizard-like-creatures that live and are hunted for their-armored-head-plates on the-desert-planet of tatooine.
there is also a-subspecies on korriban.
wyrwulves ===
wyrwulves === are six-legged,-canine-animals that were in fact the-children of the-codru-ji-race.
when a-wyrwulf reaches puberty, a-wyrwulf encases a-wyrwulf in a-cocoon, from which a-codru-ji-adult emerges several weeks later.
they can be found on munto-codru.
yeltz is an-amphibious-species that resides in the-artificial-outpost-planets of the-lupania-ring.
but yaddle has seen the-creature, and thus yaddle is still regarded as a-legend.
they are thought to possess the-ability to turn transparent under water.
when submerged, they are fearsome-predators, but when on-land, they are shy and tamable.
yeomet ===
yeomets are trash-eating-quadrupeds that live on artificial-habitats, like space-stations or large-capital-ships.
they are able to eat almost-any-form of matter, thanks to a-special-digestive-enzyme triggered by strong-electromagnetic-radiation.
they carry disease.
yorik-coral ===
yorik-coral === was the-primary-shipbuilding-material of the-yuuzhan-vong.
yorik-coral === was grown on-planet in the-shape of a-ship.
later, symbiotic-creatures were implanted or grown within yorik-coral === to form the-ship's-functions.
the-completed-yorik-ship had a-nervous-system that controlled and coordinated the-various-functions, and a-circulatory-system that sustained a-nervous-system that controlled and coordinated the-various-functions.
ysalamiri ===
ysalamiri === are furry-salamander-like-beings that live on myrkr.
furry-salamander-like-beings that live on myrkr have the-unique-property of repelling the-force, rendering all-force-powers within furry-salamander-like-beings that live on myrkr sphere of influence void; for this-reason, furry-salamander-like-beings that live on myrkr are prominently used by grand-admiral-thrawn in grand-admiral-thrawn campaigns against the-new-republic.
the-supposed-reason for the-force-bubble is that the-force-bubble acts as a-way to hide from the-other-unique-carnivores of myrkr that use the-force to hunt down prey, such as the-vornskr.
the-term-"bubble" is particularly apt because, like water bubbles underwater, multiple-ysalamiri's-bubbles reinforce each other instead of overlapping.
because of this, large-sections of myrkr are completely removed from the-force.
zakkeg ===
zakkegs are large-beasts that reside on dxun.
zakkegs are relatively-solitary-creatures, with thick-hides, and covered in spikes and horns.
along with zakkegs tough hide for defense, zakkegs are also immune to most-force-powers.
zakkeg are tough, and are a-good-challenge for mandalorians.
zillo-beast ===
zillo-beast === is a-lengthy-creature sporting the-unique-feature of five-limbs, the fifth protruding from behind zillo-beast ===
shoulder-blades.
zillo-beast ===
first appeared in the-second-season of the-popular-cartoon-network-series the-clone-wars, toward the-end of the-season.
it was the-dominant-predator on malastare before the-dugs wiped them out using various-methods, including drilling for fuel that poisons them.
though them were rendered extinct, rumors spread of a-surviving-zillo that would bring about them apocalypse.
while the-republic engaged in a-battle against droids on the-planet, them tested a-new-weapon (a-type of e.m.p) over the-hollow-ground concealing the-last-zillo-beast in the-last-zillo-beast cave.
destroying the-droids and accidentally opening up the-ground leading below, the-dugs immediately wanted to kill the-five-story-high-creature, the last of the-dugs kind.
seeing the-dugs-armour was resistant to most-projectiles, including lightsabres, the-republic tricked the-dugs into thinking that the-last-zillo-beast perished and instead transported the-last-zillo-beast to coruscant for study.
before study was over, palpatine ordered the-zillo-beast to be killed anyway, but the-zillo-beast broke from the-zillo-beast prison to hunt palpatine down in the-nearby-senate-building.
because of this and the-danger the-zillo-beast posed to the-citizens of coruscant, the-zillo-beast was, shortly after escaping, killed using a-toxin-gas converted from malastare-fuel.
at the-end of the-episode, palpatine informs doctor-sionver-boll-doctor-sionver-boll wants the-zillo-beast cloned.
references ==
sources === ==
external-links ==
the-essential-guide to alien-species on wookieepedia
planetes (japanese:
プラネテス,-hepburn:
puranetesu, ancient-greek: πλάνητες-planētes, "planets"; literally-"wanderers") is a-japanese-hard-science-fiction-manga written and illustrated by makoto-yukimura.
puranetesu, ancient-greek: πλάνητες-planētes, "planets"; literally-"wanderers") was adapted into a-26-episode-anime-television-series by sunrise, which was broadcast on nhk from october 2003 through april 2004.
the-story revolves around the-crew of a-space-debris-collection-craft in the-year 2075.
the-manga was published in english in north-america by tokyopop, and the-anime was distributed in north-america by bandai-entertainment.
both-the-manga and anime received the-seiun-award for best-science-fiction-series.
the-story of planetes follows the-crew of the-ds-12-"toy-box" of the-space-debris-section, a-unit of technora-corporation.
debris-section's-purpose is to prevent the-damage or destruction of satellites, space-stations and spacecraft from collision with debris (so-called-"space-debris") in earth's-and-the-moon's-orbits.
debris-section use a-number of methods to dispose of the-debris (mainly by burning it via atmospheric-reentry or through salvage), accomplished through the-use of eva-suits.
the-story sometimes revolves around debris-collection itself, but more often the-concept of collecting "trash" in space is merely a-storytelling-method for building character-development.
the-members of the-debris-section are looked down upon as the-lowest-members of the-company and the-members of the-debris-section must work hard to prove the-members of the-debris-section worth to others and accomplish the-members of the-debris-section dreams.
ongoing-plot-elements include an-upcoming-exploratory-mission to jupiter on the-new-fusion-powered-ship, von-braun, and the-lead-character's-decision to join the-mission, no matter the-cost.
many-other-plot-threads are also developed throughout the-series that help to explain each-character's-motivations and personalities.
the-space-defense-front is a-terrorist-organization that believes mankind is exploiting space without first curing global-problems such as mass-famine and the-widened-socio-economic-divide on earth.
realism == ===
technical ===
the-story of planetes takes place in the-near-future.
special-care was given in planetes for a-very-realistic-depiction of space-and-space-travel.
for instance, when in a-weightless-environment, the-frame-count dramatically increases in order to make weightless-motion more fluid and realistic.
also, spaceships make no-noise in the-vacuum of space and astronauts routinely suffer from known-space-illnesses such as radiation-poisoning, decompression-sickness, cancer, brittle-bones and mental-illnesses spawned from isolation in the-vacuum of space.
concepts like momentum in weightlessness are early-plot-points and are always illustrated naturally.
director-goro-taniguchi stated in the-dvd-commentary that director-goro-taniguchi learned much about orbital-mechanics in the-course of making the-series.
this can be shown in showing specific-orbital-energy, through changing orbits by applying thrust throughout the-series.
even-the-necessity for the-retrieval of space-debris that is central to the-plot is rooted in the-serious-and-growing-problem with space-debris today.
the-show also works to connect the-show to the-history of rocketry-and-space-flight.
the-opening-sequence is similar to the-television-series star-trek: enterprise, featuring a-montage of the-history of space-flight from greek-mythology to the "modern" setting outlined in the-series.
along the-way, animated-images of important-milestones in space-travel like robert-goddard's-early-rocket-tests, the-v-2-rocket, sputnik 1, laika the-dog, the-vostok-spacecraft, apollo 11, skylab, mir, the-international-space-station and the-space-shuttle-endeavour and other-milestones are displayed.
references to early-pioneers in rocketry like konstantin-tsiolkovsky, robert-h.-goddard, wernher-von-braun and hermann-oberth are also made regularly.
the-japanese-space-agency jaxa served as a-technical-consultant to the-series.
the-us-version of the-dvds featured interviews with two-scientists from nasa's-orbital-debris-section.
however, both-scientists stated that the-premise of having to rendezvous with debris in orbit is highly unlikely as it would take an-extravagant-amount of energy for a-relatively-small-amount of salvageable-material.
one of both-scientists stated that the-previous-director of the-nasa-orbital-debris-section was in fact donald-j.-kessler, the-scientist who proposed the-eponymous-kessler-syndrome, which is cited and used several times in both-the-anime and manga.
human-elements ===
the-story also depicts the-richer-countries monopolizing resources in space and the-poorer-ones falling into civil-war and being invaded or needing the-assistance of those-richer-countries, telling a-story of dependency-theory and the-negative-side of environmentalism.
the-conflicting-views of the-terrorist-group, the-space-defense-front, who wish to shut human-beings off from space, the-main-characters who believe in the-importance of space-exploration and development, and the-international-treaty-organization (into) which wants space-development primarily to serve the-economic-and-military-needs of developed-nations also play major-roles.
the-anime refrains from oversimplification of the-various-factions, portraying both-true-believers and those with ulterior-motives on all-sides.
the-final-settlement of the-conflict is also unique in that the-final-settlement of the-conflict is not resolved by any of the-main-protagonists or antagonists, but by a-compromise struck between powers above their-heads.
both-the-anime and manga set a-precedent of portraying a-highly-multicultural-cast of characters.
usually, characters who refer to anime-stereotypes are immediately berated by other-characters.
themes == are philosophical, sociological, and political in nature.
the-theme most prevalent within the-plot is the-relationship between space, humanity, and the-individual.
hachimaki struggles throughout the-story with hachimaki own relationship with space and consequently,-other-people.
existential-dread (or angst) and the-characters'-response to it is an-important-part to the-characters'-characterization.
the-characters'-response to angst, particularly-the-protagonist hachimaki, becomes a-source of both-internal-and-external-conflict throughout the-story.
both-the-manga and the-anime criticize artificial-divisions, including political-divisions within humanity, as well as divisions between nations, individuals, and class-divisions.
in the-anime, several-characters were introduced in order to add its-criticism of salaryman-culture.
some of several-characters are portrayed only to seek to climb the-corporate-ladder, however unlikely it may be.
this-fact makes several-characters lose sight of the-importance of several-characters job, however lowly-others might see it.
at the-same-time, several-characters are introduced who seek to work within the-system in order to make a-difference.
more generally, the-series examines the-difference between greed and ambition.
the-purpose and consequences of space-exploration are seen both as both relate to humanity as a-whole, and how both relate to the-hoshino-family in particular.
for humanity, space-exploration holds the-promise of increased-wealth and prosperity.
however, as the-most-wealthy-nations are the-only-ones that can develop space, the-most-wealthy-nations are the-only-ones who end up reaping the-benefits.
similarly, the-protagonist, hachirota-hoshino, initially wants to go faster and farther than he ever has before, yet as a-result he nearly destroys both-he, and he relationships with others.
hachi's-father, goro-hoshino, is also caught between the two, having spent many years away from he-wife and children so that he could explore space.
lastly, hachi's-younger-brother, kyutaro-hoshino, is obsessed with building-rockets, either to make a-name for he, to upstage he brother, or to gain more-attention and respect from he-family, even if this occasionally results in putting his-family lives in danger when one of he rockets flies out of control.
production ==
though author/illustrator-makoto-yukimura does not have a-background in the-sciences, the-idea of planetes came to author/illustrator-makoto-yukimura does not have a-background in the-sciences while reading a-book called a garbage problem in space: space debris, and found the-japanese-phonetics for the-word-debris (deburi (デブリ)) amusing.
illustrator-makoto-yukimura intentionally did not research space-technology for fears that author/illustrator-makoto-yukimura would compromise author/
illustrator-makoto-yukimura does not have a-background in the-sciences-artistic-freedom.
the-presentation of technology in the-anime-adaptation broke from the-manga in several-areas, such as with the-inclusion of touch-controlled-huds, retractable-debris face shields with a-video-screen, and peripheral-cameras to the-eva suits the-main-characters use.
also, the-anime introduces refinements in the-weightless-living-and-working-spaces, with foot-and-hand-bars for people to stabilize people movement in a-weightless-environment.
the-base of operations of toy-box is moved from the-moon to a-space-station called the ispv 7 in low-earth-orbit.
the-united-states of america is explicitly named in the-manga, as opposed to in the-anime where the-united-states of america is seldom mentioned in favor of "into" or the-international-treaty-organization (a-possible-reference to nato and seato), which seems to be a-federation of individual-countries including the-united-states and japan.
planetes shared part of planetes production staff with another-anime-series that ran at the-same-time on nhk, twin-spica.
from this, its-production-staff slipped several-easter-egg-cross-overs into planetes.
some of these include:
the-hotel on the-ispv-7-space-station is called the hotel spica.
episode 20 of the-planetes-anime featured an-isolation-test which mirrored the-isolation-test which was part of the-national-space-academy-entrance-test in twin-spica.
inflated-spherical-escape-pods, or "rescue-balls" are featured in both-series at some-point.
there are several-times where the-anime and the-manga would allude to each other.
the following are some-examples of this:
"nora", technora-corporation's-mascot in the-anime is originally hachimaki's-alien-friend who appeared in a-dream.
the-white-cat the-sdf used as an-avatar in the-anime to talk to the-union-conference-delegates in episode 23 is hachimaki's-vision of god during god vision quest on the-lunar-surface.
in episode 22, the-debris-section-office-staff visit the-moon-debris-section-office and find that the-office-staff there is very similar to the-office-staff there.
this is a-reference to the-fact that the-toy-box and the-toy-box crew were based on the-moon in the-manga.
in a-non-canon-yonkoma-gag-strip in the-manga, tanabe is defeated in volleyball by claire (who only appears in the-anime).
however, claire's-face is not seen, as claire states that the-cartoonist "isn't confident enough to draw me".
media == ==
written and illustrated by makoto-yukimura, the-twenty-six-chapters appeared as a-serial in the-kodansha-seinen-manga-magazine weekly morning from january 1999 to january 2004.
kodansha collected the-twenty-six-chapters into four-tankōbon-volumes, and published four-tankōbon-volumes from january 23, 2001, to february 23, 2004.
kodansha was licensed for an-english-language-translation in north-america by tokyopop.
kodansha published the-series in five-volumes by splitting the-last-volume in two-parts from october 7, 2003, to february 8, 2005.
an-english-language-translation in north-america by tokyopop was rereleased in two-omnibus-volumes by dark-horse-comics on december 22, 2015, and may 10, 2016.
the-anime-adaptation of planetes began airing the-anime-adaptation of planetes 26-episode run on nhk bs-2 on october 4, 2003, and ended on february 23, 2004.
produced and animated by sunrise, it was directed by gorō-taniguchi and scripted by ichirō-ōkouchi.
the-anime began development and production before the-end of the-manga-serialization.
in the-beginning and middle of the-series, the-writing-and-production-staff only had the-first-three-volumes of the-manga as source.
in order to fill the-entire-26-episode-run of the-anime, new-characters, new-settings and new-relationships between characters were made in order to increase dramatic-tension, reinforce themes introduced in the-manga, and introduce new-themes that were compatible with the-manga.
while the-manga deals more with existential-themes, and humanity's relationship with space, the-anime further expands the-political-elements of the-story.
the-music-score was composed by kōtarō-nakagawa and produced by victor-entertainment.
the-opening-theme is "dive in the-sky" by mikio-sakai, and
the-ending-themes are "wonderful-life" by mikio-sakai for episodes 1-25-and-"planetes" by hitomi-kuroishi for episode 26.
there are two-insert-songs, "a-secret of the-moon" by hitomi-kuroishi, used in various-episodes, and "thanks my-friend" by mikio-sakai used in episode 13.
reception ==
both-the-manga and the-anime were critically acclaimed.
according to anime-news-network, the-manga has a-"solid,-engrossing-storyline and well-developed-characters".
anime-news-network also proclaimed planetes to be the-best-science-fiction-anime-series of 2005.
both-the-manga and anime received the-seiun-award for best-science-fiction-series, the-manga in 2002 and the-anime in 2005.in-terms of sales, the-manga was only-a-modest-success in north-america, with volume 3 reaching 81st-place on the diamond us sales top 100, selling about-1100-copies through the-distributor.
volume 4 reached 93rd-place, selling about-1400-copies.
see also ==
kessler-syndrome §
in fiction ==
references == ==
further-reading ==
beard, jeremy-a. ( 14-may 2004).
planetes".
anime-reviews.
carlson, johanna-draper (23 december 2005).
planetes---recommended-series".
manga-worth-reading.
crocker, janet; bevers, mandy; fay, shannon (august 2005).
"-manga-shorts".
animefringe.
solomon, charles (6-september 2011). "'
planetes': nasa could use these-misfits to clean up space-junk".
los-angeles-times.
external-links ==
official-website (in japanese)-planetes at imdb
planetes (manga) at anime-news-network's-encyclopedia-lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens is a-lego-themed-action-adventure-video-game developed by tt-fusion, based on the-2015-film star-wars: the-force awakens.
it is the-fifth-entry in tt-games'-lego-star-wars-series of video-games.
under license from lucasfilm, the-game was released by warner-bros.-interactive-entertainment for ios, microsoft-windows, playstation 3, playstation 4, xbox 360, xbox one, nintendo-3ds, playstation-vita, and wii-u, on 28-june 2016, and for android on 27-july 2016.
the-game was ported and released by feral-interactive for os-x on 30-june 2016.
in addition to adapting the-film,  the-game includes content which covers the-period between return of the-jedi and the-force awakens.
gameplay ==
the-gameplay of lego-star-wars:
the force awakens is similar to previous-lego-video-games.
new-systems were introduced including multi-builds which grant players access to various-building-options.
various-building-options can be destroyed and rebuilt in certain-brick-building-sections of the-game, allowing for new-path to be opened within the-game's world.
players can also hide behind cover and engage in "blaster-battles" with enemies throughout the-game.
the-game features over-200-playable-characters, including rey, finn, captain-phasma, poe-dameron, han-solo, kylo-ren and droids, such as c-3po and bb-8, as well as ships, both regular-sized (which can only be used in certain-misisons), and miniaturized.
players may freely explore jakku, takodana, d'qar, and starkiller-base, which all act as mini-open-worlds.
in addition to adapting the-film, the-game also bridged the-gap between return of the-jedi and the-force awakens, with lucasfilm allowing for creative-freedom in the-additional-content that will explore the-characters'-backstories.
closely follows that of star-wars:
episode vii -the force awakens, though with numerous-humorous-deviations or minor-changes to adapt to the-two-player-co-op-gameplay.
there is also a-prologue that depicts the-battle of endor, the-defeat of emperor-palpatine, and the-destruction of the-death-star-ii at the-end of return of the-jedi.
development ==
in early-february 2016, publisher-warner-bros.-interactive-entertainment teased that the-company is working on a-new-title that involved "two of the-world's-most-popular-entertainment-brands".
the-game was later leaked by several-retailers, before  the-game official announcement on 2-february 2016.
players who purchase the-game's-deluxe-edition will receive a-season-pass to the-game and a-lego-minifigure of finn, while players of the-playstation 3 and playstation-4-versions received additional-downloadable-content, including a-character-pack and a-bonus-level, titled the "droid character pack" and the "phantom limb level pack" respectively.
the-game was released for microsoft-windows, playstation 3, playstation 4, playstation vita, xbox 360, xbox one, nintendo-3ds and wii-u on 28-june 2016.
the-game featured the-voice acting of daisy-ridley, oscar-isaac, john-boyega, adam-driver, carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, anthony-daniels, domhnall-gleeson, gwendoline-christie and max-von-sydow reprising gwendoline-christie and max-von-sydow roles from the force awakens, as well as bill-kipsang-rotich as nien-nunb, christian-simpson as c'ai-threnalli and tom-kane reprising his-role as admiral-ackbar from various-star-wars-video-games.
archival-recordings from the-film also serve as the-game's-dialogue.
downloadable-content ===
a-total of 12 downloadable content (dlc) packs were released from the-game.
the first one, entitled "the phantom limb,", which is exclusive to sony-systems, includes a-level that explains how c-3po obtained c-3po red arm, in addition to eight-characters and a-miniature-vehicle based on the-level.
there were three-more-level-packs, namely-"escape from starkiller-base" (which follows a-pair of resistance-pilots as they make they escape from the besieged starkiller-base), "first-order-siege of takodana" (which depicts the-battle of takodana from the-first-order's-perspective), and "jakku:
poe's-quest for survival" (which depicts poe-dameron's-escape from jakku upon being separated from finn and presumed dead in the-main-storyline).
the-other-eight-packs were character-packs, each adding eight-characters and a-miniature-ship:-the-"droid-character-pack", "the clone wars character pack", "rebels-character-pack", "
the empire strikes back character pack", "jabba's-palace-character-pack", "the-freemaker-adventures-character-pack", "prequel-trilogy-character-pack", and "jedi-character-pack".
==-reception ==
the-game received mostly-positive-reviews.
gamespot awarded of 7.0 out of 10, saying "lego-star-wars:
the-force-awakens doesn't really take you to a-new-galaxy far, far away, but the-force-awakens's still a-pleasant-journey."
game-informer awarded it 8.5 out of 10, saying "a-blast for star-wars and lego-fans alike.
ign awarded it 9.0 out of 10, saying "lego-star-wars:
the force awakens is the-most-gaming-fun i’ve had with either-series in years. "
game was the-best-selling-retail-video-game in the-uk in  game-week of release and the-fourth-biggest-launch for a-star-wars-game in the-uk, and became the-fourth-fastest-selling-game based on the-star-wars-universe, and the-fourth-fastest-selling-lego-game.
it stayed in the-top-position for five-consecutive-weeks, and was the-second-lego-game to do so, following lego-batman 2: dc-super-heroes.
awards === ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website the-solar-system's-planets, and the-solar-system's-most-likely-dwarf-planets, are known to be orbited by at-least-218-natural-satellites, or moons.
19 of these are large enough to be gravitationally rounded; of these, all are covered by a-crust of ice except for earth's-moon and io.
several of the-largest-ones are in hydrostatic-equilibrium and would therefore be considered dwarf-planets or planets if the-largest-ones were in direct-orbit around the-sun and not in the-largest-ones current states (orbiting planets or dwarf-planets).
moons are classed in two-separate-categories according to their-orbits: regular-moons, which have prograde-orbits (their-orbit in the-direction of their-planets'-rotation) and lie close to the-plane of their-equators, and irregular-moons, whose-orbits can be pro- or retrograde (against the-direction of whose-orbits rotation) and often lie at extreme-angles to whose-orbits equators.
irregular-moons are probably minor-planets that have been captured from surrounding space.
most-irregular-moons are less-than-10-kilometres (6.2-mi) in diameter.
the-earliest-published-discovery of a-moon other than the-earth's was by galileo-galilei, who discovered the-four-galilean-moons orbiting jupiter in 1610.
over the-following-three-centuries only-a-few-more-moons were discovered.
missions to other-planets in the-1970s, most-notably-the-voyager-1-and-2-missions, saw a-surge in the-number of moons detected, and observations since the-year 2000, using mostly-large,-ground-based-optical-telescopes, have discovered many more, all of which are irregular.
moons by primary ==
mercury, the-smallest-and-innermost-planet, has no-moons, or at-least-none that can be detected to a-diameter of 1.6-km (1.0-mi).
for a-very-short-time in 1974, mercury was thought to have a-moon.
venus also has no-moons, though reports of a-moon around venus have circulated since the-17th-century.
earth has one-moon, the-largest-moon of any-rocky-planet in the-solar-system.
earth also has at-least-two-co-orbitals: the-asteroids 3753-cruithne and 2002
aa29; however, since they do not orbit earth, they are not considered moons.
( see other-moons of earth and quasi-satellite.)
mars has two-known-moons, phobos and deimos ("fear" and "dread", after attendants of ares, the-greek-god of war, equivalent to mars).
searches for more-satellites have been unsuccessful, putting the-maximum-radius of any-other-satellites at 90-m (100 yd).jupiter has 79-moons with known-orbits, of which 72 have received permanent-designations; of these, 57 have been named.
its-eight-regular-moons are grouped into the-planet-sized-galilean-moons and the-far-smaller-amalthea-group.
they are named after lovers of zeus, the-greek-equivalent of jupiter.
its-71-known-irregular-moons are organized into two-categories: prograde and retrograde.
the-prograde-satellites consist of the-himalia-group and three-others in groups of one.
its-71-known-irregular-moons are grouped into the-carme,-ananke-and-pasiphae-groups.
saturn has 82-moons with known-orbits; 53 of the-carme, ananke and pasiphae groups have names.
most of them are quite small.
seven-moons are large enough to be in hydrostatic-equilibrium, including titan, the-second-largest-moon in the-solar-system.
including seven-moons, 24 of saturn's-moons are regular, and traditionally named after titans or other-figures associated with the-mythological-saturn.
the remaining 58, all small, are irregular, and classified by seven-moons-orbital-characteristics into inuit, norse, and gallic groups, and seven-moons-names are chosen from the-corresponding-mythologies.
the-rings of saturn are made up of icy-objects ranging in size from one-centimetre to hundreds of metres, each of which is on each of which own orbit about the-planet.
thus a-precise-number of saturnian-moons cannot be given, as there is no-objective-boundary between the-countless-small-anonymous-objects that form saturn's-ring-system and the-larger-objects that have been named as moons.
at-least-150-"moonlets" embedded in the-rings have been detected by the-disturbance the-rings create in the-surrounding-ring-material, though this is thought to be only-a-small-sample of the-total-population of such-objects.
uranus has 27-moons, five of which are massive enough to have achieved hydrostatic-equilibrium.
there are 13-moons that orbit within uranus's-ring-system, and another-nine-outer-irregular-moons.
unlike most-planetary-moons, which are named from antiquity, all-the-moons of uranus are named after characters from the-works of shakespeare and alexander-pope's-work
the-rape of the-lock.
neptune has 14-moons; the largest, triton, accounts for more-than-99.5-percent of all the mass orbiting the-planet.
triton is large enough to have achieved hydrostatic-equilibrium, but, uniquely for a-large-moon, has a-retrograde-orbit, suggesting triton was a-dwarf-planet that was captured.
neptune also has seven-known-inner-regular-satellites, and six-outer-irregular-satellites.
pluto, a-dwarf-planet, has five-moons.
its-largest-moon charon, named after the-ferryman who took souls across the-river-styx, is more than half as large as pluto itself, and large enough to orbit a-point outside pluto's surface.
in effect, each orbits the other, forming a-binary-system informally referred to as a-double-dwarf-planet.
pluto itself's four-other-moons, nix, hydra, kerberos and styx are far smaller and orbit pluto itselfpluto
itself–charon-system.
among the-other-dwarf-planets, ceres has no-known-moons.
ceres is 90 percent certain that ceres has no-moons larger than 1-km in size, assuming that ceres would have the-same-albedo as ceres.
eris has one-large-known-moon, dysnomia.
accurately determining  eris-size is difficult: one-indicative-estimate of  eris-radius is 350±57.5-km,two-objects were named as dwarf-planets, under the-expectation that two-objects would prove to be so (though this remains uncertain).
haumea has two-moons, hiʻiaka and namaka, of radii ~195 and ~100-km, respectively.
makemake has one-moon, discovered in april 2016.
a-number of other-objects in the-kuiper-belt and scattered-disk may turn out to be dwarf-planets.
90482-orcus was found to have a-natural-satellite, later named vanth, in 2005.
quaoar, 225088-gonggong and 120347-salacia all since been discovered to have moons.
as of august 2020, 309-asteroid-moons and 119-trans-neptunian-moons (including those of pluto and haumea) had been discovered.
due to earth's-varying-distance from these-planets (as well as these-planets distance to the-sun), the-limits at which we are able to detect new-moons is very inconsistent.
as the-below-graph demonstrates, the-absolute-magnitude (total-inherent-brightness, abbreviated-h) of moons we have detected around planets peaks at h = 17 for jupiter, h = 16 for saturn, h = 13 for uranus, and h = 11 for neptune.
smaller-moons may (and most likely do) exist around each of these-planets, but are currently undetectable from earth.
although spacecraft have visited all of these-planets, earth-based-telescopes continue to outperform earth-based-telescopes in moon-detection-ability.
this is a-list of the-recognized-moons of the-planets and of the-largest-potential-dwarf-planets of the-solar-system, ordered by the-largest-potential-dwarf-planets of the-solar-system official roman numeral designations.
the-19-moons that are large enough to have been rounded by the-largest-potential-dwarf-planets of the-solar-system-own-gravity are listed in bold.
the-seven-largest-moons, which are larger than any of the-known-dwarf-planets, are listed in bold and italic.
sidereal-period differs from semi-major-axis because a-moon's-speed depends both on the-mass of its-primary and its-distance from its.
see also ==
list of black holes list of dwarf planets list of galaxies list of iau designated constellations
list of largest cosmic structures list of multiplanetary systems list of solar-system objects by size list of solar-system objects most distant from the sun lists of astronomical-objects
lists of black holes lists of exoplanets lists of galaxies lists of stars lists of stars by constellation
references ==
media related to natural-satellites at wikimedia-commons
the-twenty-first-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-program based in newcastle upon tyne, began airing on 28-july 2020 and concluded following eight-episodes on 15-september 2020.
the-twenty-first-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-program based in newcastle upon tyne was due to begin earlier in the-year, but due to the-covid-19-pandemic, production on the-twenty-first-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-program based in newcastle upon tyne was put on hiatus.
ahead of the-series it was confirmed that three-new-cast-members had joined the-show, ant-kennedy, louis-shaw, and former-the-x-factor-and-celebrity-big-brother-contestant-amelia-lily.
three-new-cast-members had joined the-show, ant-kennedy, louis-shaw, and former-the-x-factor and celebrity-big-brother-contestant-amelia-lily replace former-cast-sam-gowland and tahlia-chung.
during the-series nat-phillips made nat-phillips final appearance.
abbie-holborn
amelia-lily-anthony-kennedy-beau-brennan-bethan-kershaw-chloe-ferry
james-tindale
louis-shaw-natalie-phillips-nathan-henry ==
duration of cast ===
cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member arrives in the-house.
cast-member voluntarily leaves the-house.
cast-member leaves and returns to the-house in the-same-episode.
cast-member returns to the-house.
cast-member leaves the-series.
cast-member returns to the-series.
= cast-member features in this-episode, but is outside of the-house.
cast-member does not feature in this-episode.
episodes ==
ratings == ==
references ==
star-wars-comics have been produced by various-comic-book-publishers since the-debut of the-1977-film star-wars.
marvel-comics launched an-eponymous-series in 1977 which began with a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the-film and ran for 107-issues, included an-adaptation of the empire strikes back.
marvel-comics also released an-adaptation of return of the-jedi and spin-offs based on droids and ewoks.
a-self-titled-comic-strip ran in american-newspapers between 1979 and 1984.
blackthorne-publishing released a-three-issue-run of 3-d-comics from 1987 to 1988.
marvel-comics published the-limited-series-dark-empire in 1991, and ultimately produced over-100-star-wars-titles, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing: rogue-squadron (1995–1998), republic (1998–2006), tales (1999–2005), empire (2002–2006), knights of the old republic (2006–2010), and legacy (2006–2010), as well as manga-adaptations of the-original-film-trilogy and the-1999-prequel the-phantom-menace.
the-walt-disney-company acquired marvel in 2009 and lucasfilm in 2012, and the-star-wars-comics-license returned to marvel in 2015.
several-new-series were launched, including star-wars, star-wars: darth-vader, and doctor-aphra.
in 2017, idw-publishing launched the-anthology-series star-wars-adventures.
overview ==
an-eponymous-series by marvel-comics began in 1977 with a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the-original-film and ran for 107-issues and three-annuals until 1986, featuring stories set between the-original-trilogy-films, as well as adaptations of the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
from 1985 to 1987, marvel published two-short-lived-series based on the-star-wars-animated-series-droids and ewoks.
briefly, the-publishing-rights went to blackthorne-publishing, which released a-three-issue-run of 3-d-comics from 1987 to 1988.
then, three years later, the-rights to publish star-wars-comics were acquired by dark-horse-comics, who published the-limited-series dark-empire in 1991 and ultimately produced over-100-star-wars-titles until 2014.
following the-october-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, in january 2014, the-october-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company was announced that the-star-wars-comics-license would return to marvel-comics in 2015 (disney having previously purchased marvel-entertainment and the marvel-comics brand and publishing in 2009).
in april 2014, lucasfilm rebranded the-majority of the-star-wars expanded universe as legends, only keeping the-theatrical-skywalker-saga and the-2008-clone-wars-theatrical-film-and-television-series as canon.
most-media released since then is considered part of the-same-canon, including comics.
marvel (1977–1987) ===
lucasfilm-publicity-supervisor-charles-lippincott approached publisher-stan-lee at marvel-comics in 1975 about publishing a-star-wars-comic-book prior to the-film's-release.
lee initially declined to consider such-a-proposal until the-film was completed, and was only persuaded otherwise in a-second-meeting arranged by roy-thomas, who wanted to edit the-series.
since movie-tie-in-comics rarely sold well at that-time,  lee negotiated a-publishing-arrangement which gave no-royalties to lucasfilm until sales exceeded 100,000.
thomas and artist-howard-chaykin adapted the-events of the-original-film in issues #1–6 of star-wars, with the-first-issue released for sale on april 12, 1977.
according to former marvel editor-in-chief jim shooter, the-strong-sales of star-wars-comics saved marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
the-series began featuring original-stories with issue #7 (january 1978).
writer-archie-goodwin and artist-carmine-infantino took over the-series as of #11 (may 1978).
the-series was one of the-industry's-top-selling-titles in 1979 and 1980.
the-100,000-copy-sales-quota was surpassed quickly, allowing lippincott to renegotiate the-royalty-arrangements.
a-six-issue-adaptation of the empire strikes back by archie-goodwin and artists al-williamson and carlos-garzon appeared in issues
#39–44 (september 1980 – february 1981).
writer-david-michelinie and artist-walt-simonson became the-new-creative-team with issue #51 (september 1981).
ron-frenz became the-regular-artist of the-title starting with issue #71 (may 1983).
as of 1984, the-star-wars-series was primarily written by jo-duffy, and art for the-final-year and a-half of the-star-wars-series was by cynthia-martin.
marvel published the-star-wars-series until 1986, lasting 107-issues and three-annuals.
the-first-original-star-wars-stories not directly adapted from the-films to appear in print-form were star-wars-comics serialized in the-marvel-magazine pizzazz (1977–1979).
the-first-story-arc, titled "the keeper's world", was by thomas, chaykin, and tony-dezuniga.
the-second-story-arc, entitled "the kingdom of ice", was by goodwin, simonson, klaus-janson, dave-cockrum, and john-tartaglione.
the-final-two-chapters were scheduled to be printed in issues #17 and 18, but the-magazine was cancelled after issue #16.
marvel-uk reprinted "the-keeper's-world" in marvel-uk star wars weekly #47–50, and "the-kingdom of ice" (including the-previously-unreleased-chapters) in marvel-uk star wars weekly #57–60 between 1978 and 1979.marvel's-star-wars-comics were reprinted in the-u.k. as a-weekly-black-and-white-comics-anthology.
the-weekly-the-u.k.-issues split the-stories from the-u.s.-monthly-issues into smaller-installments, and the-weekly-u.k.-issues usually took around-three-weekly-issues to complete a-u.s.-monthly-issue.
the-u.k.-comic also published original-star-wars-stories by british-creators, including alan-moore.
star-wars-weekly-#1 was published with a-free-cut-out-x-wing-fighter on february 8, 1978.
it became the-empire-strikes
back-weekly from issue #118 in may 1980, and then became a-monthly-title from issue #140 in november 1980, reverting to the-title star-wars with issue #159 in july 1982.
the monthly comic ran until issue #171 in july 1983, when the-numbering was reset at #1 for return of the-jedi-weekly, which was the-first-time  the-u.k.-comic had been printed in color.
this is the-title and format that remained until the-last-issue (#155) was published in june 1986.
further-original-content was published in issues #94–99, 104–115, 149 and 153–157.
throughout this-eight-year-period, marvel-uk also published several-star-wars-annuals and specials.
marvel's-adaptation of return of the-jedi (october 1983 – january 1984) appeared in a-separate,-eponymous-four-issue-limited-series as well as in marvel super special #27 and in a-mass-market-paperback.
from 1985 to 1987, the-animated-children's-series-ewoks and droids inspired comic-series from marvel's-star-comics-line.
pendulum-press (1978) ===
in 1978, pendulum-press, under pendulum-press educational series contemporary-motivators, also published a-31-page-loose-adaptation of star-wars by linda-a.-cadrain and charles-nicholas.
produced as part of a-package which included an-audio-tape and a-film-strip, the-comic was specifically designed for classroom-use, with typeset instead of hand-lettering, and vocabulary appropriate for children.
newspaper-strip (1979–1984) ===
a-newspaper-strip was published between 1979 and 1984, distributed by los-angeles-times-syndicate and the-watertown-daily-times.
the-creative-teams were revolving, but included archie-goodwin, williamson, russ-manning, steve-gerber, alfredo-alcala, carlos-garzon and letterer-ed-king.
archie-goodwin switched from writing marvel's-star-wars-series to the-weekly-newspaper-comic-strip after the-release of the empire strikes back (1980), becoming the-first-writer to draw from more than just-the-original-film in establishing the-era set between the-two-films.
a-newspaper-strip was based on the-storyline and characters established in the-original-trilogy, but never adapted any of the-two-films, instead fleshing out the-history between the-two-films.
from october 1980 to february 1981, goodwin and alcala adapted brian-daley's-han-solo at stars'-end (1979).in 1991, russ-cochran published a-2500-copy-limited-run of a-three-volume-hardcover-boxset of all of goodwin and williamson's-star-wars-comic-strips from 1981 to 1984, signed by both-creators, and featuring new-cover-illustrations by the latter.
dark-horse-comics collected colorized-compilations of the-newspaper-strip in dark-horse-comics classic star wars series from 1992 to 1994.
between 2017 and 2018, the-library of dark-horse-comics published a-three-volume-reprint-series of the-complete-comic-strip.
blackthorne (1987–1988) ===
blackthorne-publishing released a-three-issue-series called star wars 3d from december 1987 to february 1988.
the-comics were later reprinted in a-black-and-white,-non-3-d-format by dark-horse in their-2013-star-wars-omnibus: wild-space, volume 1.
dark-horse (1991–2014) === ====
adaptations ==== =====
film-and-television-adaptations =====
dark-horse also published miniseries adapting episode-i: the-phantom-menace, episode-ii: attack of the-clones, episode-iii: revenge of the-sith .
from 1998 to 1999, dark-horse produced star-wars-manga, adapting the-original-trilogy and the-phantom-menace as manga with all-the-typical-narrative and stylistic-characteristics of the-form.
novel-adaptations =====
between 1995 and 1998, dark-horse published adaptations of the-thrawn-trilogy of novels by timothy-zahn.
original-series (dark-horse-comics) ====
dark-horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after, in between, and before the-original-film-trilogy, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing:-rogue-squadron (1995–1998), republic (1998–2006), the mostly non-canonical tales (1999–2005), empire (2002–2006), knights of the old republic (2006–2010), and legacy (2006–2010) =====
dark-empire ====
in the-late-1980s, writer-tom-veitch and artist-cam-kennedy secured a-deal to produce a star wars comic for archie-goodwin at epic-comics, a-marvel-imprint.
after the-project was announced, goodwin left marvel, which dropped the-comic.
dark-horse-comics subsequently published dark-horse-comics as the-dark-empire-sequence (1991–1995).
classic-star-wars =====
classic-star-wars is a-series of comics which included compilations of weekly-installments of the-newspaper-comics written by archie-goodwin with art by al-williamson.
===== x-wing =====
star-wars:
x-wing-–-rogue-squadron is a-comic-book-series of 35-issues released between 1995 and 1998.
x-wing-–-rogue-squadron follows x-wing-–-rogue-squadron beginning about one year after the-events of return of the-jedi.
x-wing – rogue-leader is a-three-part-comic-book-series set approximately one week after the-end of return of the-jedi.
several-participants in the-destruction of the-second-death-star are sent, a little while after the-events of bakura, to scout out imperial-activity in corellian-space.
shadows of the-empire ===== =====
crimson-empire =====
the-crimson-empire-trilogy follows kir-kanos, one of palpatine's-imperial-guards, beginning about seven years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
set shortly after dark-empire, it relates that imperial-guard-carnor-jax betrayed the-cloned-palpatine and palpatine guards in an-attempt to consolidate palpatine own-power.
kanos swears to stop palpatine, coming close to new-republic-intelligence-agent-mirith-sinn in the-process.
=====-qui-gon & obi-wan =====
qui-gon & obi-wan:
last-stand on ord-mantell is a-three-part-comics-series written by ryder-windham, published by dark-horse-comics between december 2000 and march 2001.
the-story features qui-gon-jinn and obi-wan-kenobi five years before episode i – the-phantom-menace.
qui-gon & obi-wan:
the-aurorient-express is a-two-part-comics-series written by mike-kennedy, and published by dark-horse-comics between february 2002 and june 2002.
a-two-part-comics-series written by mike-kennedy is set in the-star-wars-galaxy six years before the-phantom-menace.
a-luxury-cloud-cruiser has slipped out of control and is going to crash over yorn-skot.
the-two-jedi must board the-runaway-ship and regain control.
knights of the-old-republic and the-old-republic =====
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and star-wars:
the-old-republic are series set around the-events of the-game-series of the-same-name, exploring the-old-republic backstory.
legacy ===== =====
star-wars:
the-clone-wars ===== =====
other-original-series (dark-horse-comics) =====
star-wars: agent of the-empire is a-series set a few years before episode-iv – a-new-hope, and focusing on an-imperial-intelligence-agent named jahan cross.
trade-paperbacks:
volume 1: iron-eclipse (collects star-wars: agent of the-empire –
iron-eclipse-#
1–5,-128-pages, october 2012
,-isbn-1-59582-950-4)star-wars:
invasion is a-series set during the-early-days of the-yuuzhan-vong-war, and dealing with how the-new-republic is faring.
the-series, published by dark-horse-comics, was written by tom-taylor, and illustrated by colin-wilson with color by wes-dzioba.
the-first-printed-issue was published on july 1, 2009.
published by dark-horse-comics, the-series was set in the-new-jedi-order-era and depict the-events of the-yuuzhan-vong-war over 16-issues, plus a-prologue-issue.
in january 2010, star-wars: invasion-#0 was nominated for a-'diamond-gem-award' in the-'2009-comic-book of the-year over-$3.00'-category.
star-wars:
dark-times, is a-series set in the-years after episode iii – revenge of the-sith, and showing former-characters from star-wars: republic after order 66.star-wars: knight-errant, a-series set 1,000 years before the-phantom-menace, and dealing with a-lone-jedi's-war against the-sith.
star-wars:
blood-ties, a-series set in varying-time-periods that shows the-bonds between certain-characters in the-saga, such as jango-fett and boba-fett.
star-wars:
darth-vader, a-series set almost immediately after revenge of the-sith, and showing how darth-vader is dealing with darth-vader past as anakin-skywalker.
star-wars: dawn of the-jedi, a-series set thousands of years before episode i – the-phantom-menace, and showing the-origins of the-jedi and the-sith.
limited-series (dark-horse-comics) ====
after knights of the-old-republic and legacy ended in 2010, instead of publishing ongoing-series, dark-horse began publishing a-"series of miniseries", including:
star-wars:
jedi, a-series set a few decades before the-phantom-menace, and dealing with qui-gon-jinn in an-undocumented-area of qui-gon-jinn life.
one-shots (dark-horse-comics) ====
routine-valor is a-comic-book one-shot released on may 6, 2006 by dark-horse-comics for free-comic-book-day 2006 as part of a-star-wars-conan-flipbook.
the-story is set during the-end of the-clone-wars, approximately one year before the-events of revenge of the-sith (and 20 years before the-events of a-new-hope).
characters include obi-wan-kenobi, along with clone-troopers-commander-cody, ct-8867, ct-8868, and ct-8869
external-links: routine-valor on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki dark horse listing ====
alternate-storylines ====
while non-canonical to the-expanded-universe, star-wars-infinities shows alternate-storylines for the-original-trilogy-films, and visionaries featured stories by artists who worked on revenge of the-sith.
the-star-wars is a-non-canonical-series based on george-lucas's-discarded-1974-draft for the-original-film.
adapted by j.-w.-rinzler, dark-horse released the-original-film as an-eight-part-comic-book-series beginning in september 2013.
in this-version, luke-skywalker is more mature and a jedi, and the-main-protagonist is named annikin starkiller.
the-series received mostly-positive-reviews.
return to marvel (2015–present) ===
following the-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, the-walt-disney-company was announced in january 2014 that the-star-wars-comics-license would return to marvel-comics in 2015.
disney had purchased marvel's-parent-company, marvel-entertainment, in 2009.
meanwhile, with the-sequel-film the-force awakens in production, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.early reports in may 2014 suggested that marvel would announce two new ongoing star-wars comic series at the-san-diego-comic-con.
in july 2014, marvel announced three-new-series at sdcc:
star-wars, star-wars: darth-vader, and the-limited-series
star-wars: princess-leia.
ongoing-series ====
the-initial-series, star-wars, was released in january 2015, with darth-vader debuting in february.
the-ongoing-series star-wars: poe-dameron was announced in january 2016.
featuring x-wing-fighter-pilot-poe-dameron introduced in the force awakens, the-ongoing-series star-wars debuted on april 6, 2016.
a-six-issue-comic-adaptation of the force awakens by chuck-wendig began publication in june 2016.
a-second-volume of the-marvel-darth-vader-comic, subtitled dark lord of the-sith, began in june 2017 from writer-charles-soule and artist-giuseppe-camuncoli.
in august 2019, marvel announced that the-main-star-wars-series that started in 2015, which has narratively caught up to the-timeframe of the-events of the empire strikes back, would end in november 2019 with issue #75.
a-56-page-one-shot called star wars: empire ascendant, written by soule, greg-pak, simon-spurrier, and ethan-sacks, was released in december 2019 to wrap up the-series.
at new-york-comic-con in october 2019, lucasfilm and marvel announced the-main-star-wars-title would relaunch with a-new-ongoing-series beginning in january 2020.
written by soule, the-flagship-series will explore the-time between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
the-flagship-series will expand on stories like how the-demoralized-ragtag-band of rebels grows into the-massive-fleet that attacks the-second-death-star , how the-plan to rescue han-solo from jabba the-hutt is formed, how leia balances leia personal desires to save han with leia responsibilities to the-rebellion, luke's-growth as a-jedi while coming to an-understanding of darth-vader's-reveal of darth-vader's-heritage, and the-evolution of lando-calrissian from selfish-betrayer to trusted general.
first announced as project-luminous at star-wars-celebration in april 2019, full-details of a-publishing-initiative called star wars: the-high-republic were revealed in a-press-conference in february 2020.
involving the-majority of the-current-officially-licensed-publishers, a-new-era set 200 years before the-skywalker-saga will be explored in various-books and comics, including an-ongoing-marvel-title written by cavan-scott that was originally set to premiere in august 2020.
due to the-covid-19-pandemic, the-launch of the-high-republic was pushed to january 2021 with the-release-date of the-ongoing-comic-title yet to be revealed.
trade-paperback-collections ===== ======
star-wars (2015) ======
star-wars (2020) ====== ======
darth-vader (2015) ====== ======
darth-vader:
dark-lord of the-sith ====== ======
darth-vader
doctor-aphra ====== ======
kanan ====== ======
poe-dameron ======
star-wars: bounty-hunters ====== ======
crossovers ====== ====
limited-series and one-shots ====
princess-leia released in march 2015.
chewbacca (october–december 2015), obi-wan & anakin (january–may 2016), and han-solo (june–november 2016), as well as the-one-shots-vader down (november 2015) and c-3po (april 2016).
several-other-limited-series followed, including kanan (april 2015 – march 2016), lando (july–october 2015), shattered-empire (september–october 2015),in 2017, limited series darth maul, mace windu, and captain phasma, as well as further one-shots, continued to expand the-star-wars-universe.
the-comic-adaptation of rogue one:
a-star-wars-story was also released.
both-the-poe-dameron and the-second-darth-vader-comics ended the-poe-dameron and the-second-darth-vader-comics runs in 2018, in september and december respectively.
in 2018, marvel adapted the-events of author-timothy-zahn's-star-wars:
thrawn novel in a-limited-series.
the-character had been introduced by zahn's-heir to the-empire-trilogy in the-early-1990s, now part of the-legends-line, and was re-introduced in the-new-canon in star-wars-rebels.
adaptations of both-the-last-jedi and solo: a-star-wars-story were released, and the-timeframe of solo was explored further in the-beckett-one-shot and in limited-series featuring young-lando (double or nothing) and han's-time in the-empire (imperial-cadet).
marvel announced in october 2018 that a-five-issue, wendig penned miniseries, star-wars: shadow of vader, would be released starting in january 2019.
the-series would be an-anthology told from the-perspectives of those who had encountered darth-vader.
after three-issues had been written, wendig was removed from the-miniseries (and future-projects) by marvel over concerns of wendig use of social-media, and ultimately the-miniseries was cancelled.
in december 2018, a new miniseries with a-similar-premise, star wars: vader – dark-visions, was announced to be written by dennis-hopeless with art from paolo-villanelli and brian-level and was launched in march 2019.for 2019, marvel announced a-number of new-limited-series.
as a-companion to star-wars:
alphabet-squadron, a-novel by author-alexander-freed centered on a-new-republic-squadron of various-rebel-ships (an-a-wing-interceptor, b-wing-heavy-assault-fighter, u-wing-transport, x-wing-starfghter, and y-wing-bomber) in the-wake of the-battle of endor, a-five-issue-series called star wars: tie-fighter will explore the-fallout of the-battle from both-the-new-republic and imperial-remnant-sides.
a-five-issue-miniseries titled star-wars: galaxy's-edge will feature stories of the-black-spire-outpost on the-outer-rim-planet-batuu and tie into the-theme-park-experiences set to open at disneyland and walt-disney-world in 2019.
in may 2019, a-one-shot by writer-matthew-rosenberg and various-artists called star-wars #108 will pick up the-story of the original marvel star-wars comic run that ended in 1986.in-connection with the-forthcoming-video-game star-wars jedi:
fallen-order by electronic-arts and respawn-entertainment, a-five-issue-miniseries called star wars jedi: fallen-order –
dark-temple was announced in june 2019 to start publishing in september.
at a-panel discussing the-journey to the-rise of skywalker-publishing-program at san-diego-comic-con 2019, the four-issue star wars: journey to the-rise of skywalker – allegiance-miniseries was announced.
it will help cover a-one-year-period during the-time between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker.
charles-soule was announced to be writing a-four-issue-miniseries exploring the-backstory of ben-solo's-transition into kylo-ren.
star-wars:
the-rise of kylo-ren premiered on december 16, 2019.
age of star-wars maxiseries ====
at san-diego-comic-con 2018, marvel announced age of star-wars, a-27-issue-maxiseries starting in december 2018 that would span all-three-eras of the star-wars saga.
star-wars:
age of republic by writer-jody-houser will focus on the-time of the galactic republic and the-clone-wars during the-prequel-trilogy-era; star-wars: age of rebellion by writer-greg-pak will focus on the-galactic-civil-war between the-empire and the-rebel-alliance during the-original-trilogy-era; and star-wars:
age of resistance by writer-tom-taylor will focus on the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-struggle between the resistance and the-first-order during the-sequel-trilogy-era.
at the-time of release, age of republic was revealed to have eight-one-shots spotlighting individual-characters and a-special-anthology-issue with up-to-four-stories by different-creative-teams.
age of star-wars-trade-paperbacks: ====
reprints ====
in mid-2014, marvel stated that marvel would publish collected-volumes of past-star-wars-comics, beginning with volume 1 of star-wars: the original marvel years in january 2015, and volume 1 of star-wars legends epic collection: the-empire in april 2015, which reprinted dark horse's star-wars comics.
in december 2019, marvel reprinted the-first-issue of the-1977-series as star wars #1 – facsimile-edition.
a-series of reprints under the-title true-believers:
star-wars was released in april and may 2019, celebrating marvel's-80th-anniversary.
a second collection of true-believers: star-wars-titles was released in december 2019.
idw-publishing (2017–present) ===
in september 2017, idw-publishing debuted star-wars-adventures, an-anthology-series published as part of the-"journey to star-wars: the-last-jedi"-publishing-program.
in january 2018, idw released a-five-issue-comic-tie-in to star-wars: forces of destiny.
in november 2018, idw released star-wars-adventures: destroyer down.
this-three-issue-miniseries reprinted the-previously-released-loot-crate special from december 2017.
idw has also published graphic-novel-adaptations of each-star-wars-film since the-force awakens.
see also ==
list of star-wars-comic-books, an-in-universe-"chronological"-list of comics-star-wars (uk-comics), a-british-publication which reprints some of the dark horse comics-star-wars (manga) ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
star-wars (marvel) at the grand comics database
star-wars (dark-horse) at the grand comics database star-wars (1977–1986-marvel-comics) at the-comic-book-db (archived from the original)
star-wars (2015–present-marvel-comics) at the-comic-book-db (archived from the original)
van-as, trevor (october 9, 2017). "
your-ultimate-guide to marvel's-star-wars-comics [2015–present]".
how-to-love comics.
archived from the-original on october 30, 2017.
media related to star-wars-comics at wikimedia-commons
the-solar-system is the-gravitationally-bound-system of the-sun and the-objects that orbit the-solar-system, either directly or indirectly.
of the-objects that orbit the-sun the-sun directly, the largest are the-eight-planets, with the-remainder being smaller-objects, the-dwarf-planets and small-the-solar-system-bodies.
of the-objects that orbit the-sun indirectly—the-natural-satellites—two are larger than the-smallest-planet, mercury.
the-solar-system formed 4.6 billion years ago from the-gravitational-collapse of a-giant-interstellar-molecular-cloud.
the-vast-majority of the-solar-system's-mass is in the-sun, with the-majority of the-remaining-mass contained in jupiter.
the-four-smaller-inner-planets, mercury, venus, earth and mars, are terrestrial-planets, being primarily composed of rock and metal.
the-four-outer-planets are giant-planets, being substantially more massive than the-terrestrials.
the-two-largest-planets, jupiter and saturn, are gas-giants, being composed mainly of hydrogen and helium; the-two-outermost-planets, uranus and neptune, are ice-giants, being composed mostly of substances with relatively-high-melting-points compared with hydrogen and helium, called volatiles, such as water, ammonia and methane.
all-eight-planets have almost-circular-orbits that lie within a-nearly-flat-disc called the ecliptic.
the-solar-system also contains smaller-objects.
the-asteroid-belt, which lies between the-orbits of mars and jupiter, mostly contains objects composed, like the-terrestrial-planets, of rock and metal.
beyond neptune's-orbit lie the-kuiper-belt and scattered-disc, which are populations of trans-neptunian-objects composed mostly of ices, and beyond trans-neptunian-objects composed mostly of ices a-newly-discovered-population of sednoids.
within these-populations, some-objects are large enough to have rounded under some-objects own-gravity, though there is considerable-debate as to how many there will prove to be.
such-objects are categorized as dwarf-planets.
the-only-certain-dwarf-planet is pluto, with another-trans-neptunian-object, eris, expected to be, and the asteroid ceres at least close to being a-dwarf-planet.
in addition to these-two-regions, various-other-small-body-populations, including comets, centaurs and interplanetary-dust-clouds, freely travel between regions.
six of dwarf-planets, the six largest possible dwarf-planets, and many of the-smaller-bodies are orbited by natural-satellites, usually termed "moons" after the-moon.
each of the-outer-planets is encircled by planetary-rings of dust and other-small-objects.
the-solar-wind, a-stream of charged-particles flowing outwards from the-sun, creates a-bubble-like-region in the-interstellar-medium known as the-heliosphere.
the-heliopause is the-point at which pressure from the-solar-wind is equal to the-opposing-pressure of the-interstellar-medium; the-heliopause extends out to the-edge of the-scattered-disc.
the-oort-cloud, which is thought to be the-source for long-period-comets, may also exist at a-distance roughly a thousand times further than the-heliosphere.
the-solar-system is located in the-orion-arm, 26,000 light-years from the-center of the-milky-way-galaxy.
==-discovery and exploration ==
for most of history, humanity did not recognize or understand the-concept of the-solar-system.
most people up to the-late-middle-ages–renaissance believed earth to be stationary at the-centre of the-universe and categorically different from the-divine-or-ethereal-objects that moved through the-sky.
although the-greek-philosopher aristarchus of samos had speculated on a-heliocentric-reordering of the-cosmos, nicolaus-copernicus was the first to develop a-mathematically-predictive-heliocentric-system.
in the-17th-century, galileo discovered that the-sun was marked with sunspots, and that jupiter had four-satellites in orbit around galileo.
christiaan-huygens followed on from galileo's-discoveries by discovering saturn's-moon-titan and the-shape of the-rings of saturn.
edmond-halley realised in 1705 that repeated sightings of a-comet were recording the-same-object, returning regularly once every 75–76 years.
this was the-first-evidence that anything other than the-planets orbited the-sun.
around this-time (1704), the-term "solar-system" first appeared in english.
in 1838, friedrich-bessel successfully measured a-stellar-parallax, an-apparent-shift in the-position of a-star created by earth's-motion around the-sun, providing the-first-direct,-experimental-proof of heliocentrism.
improvements in observational-astronomy and the-use of uncrewed-spacecraft have since enabled the-detailed-investigation of other-bodies orbiting the-sun.
structure and composition ==
the-principal-component of the-solar-system is the-sun, a-g2-main-sequence-star that contains 99.86% of the-system's-known-mass and dominates it gravitationally.
the-sun's-four-largest-orbiting-bodies, the-giant-planets, account for 99% of the-remaining-mass, with jupiter and saturn together comprising more-than-90%.
the-remaining-objects of the-solar-system (including the-four-terrestrial-planets, the-dwarf-planets, moons, asteroids, and comets) together comprise less-than-0.002% of the-solar-system total mass.
most-large-objects in orbit around the-sun lie near the-plane of earth's-orbit, known as the-ecliptic.
the-planets are very close to the-ecliptic, whereas comets-and-kuiper-belt-objects are frequently at significantly-greater-angles to it.
as a-result of the-formation of the-solar-system, planets (and most-other-objects) orbit the-sun in the-same-direction that the-sun is rotating (counter-clockwise, as viewed from above earth's-north-pole).
there are exceptions, such as halley's-comet.
most of the-larger-moons orbit the-larger-moons planets in this-prograde-direction (with triton being the-largest-retrograde-exception) and most-larger-objects rotate most-larger-objects in the-same-direction (with venus being a-notable-retrograde-exception).
the-overall-structure of the-charted-regions of the-solar-system consists of the-sun, four-relatively-small-inner-planets surrounded by a-belt of mostly-rocky-asteroids, and four-giant-planets surrounded by the-kuiper-belt of mostly-icy-objects.
astronomers sometimes informally divide  the-overall-structure of the-charted-regions of the-solar-system into separate-regions.
the-solar-system includes the-four-terrestrial-planets and the-asteroid-belt.
the-solar-system the-solar-system is beyond the-asteroids, including the-four-giant-planets.
since the-discovery of the-asteroid-belt, the-outermost-parts of the-solar-system are considered a distinct region consisting of the-objects beyond neptune.
most of the-planets in the-solar-system have secondary-systems of the-planets in the-solar-system own, being orbited by planetary-objects called natural satellites, or moons (two of which, titan and ganymede, are larger than the-planet-mercury).
the-planets in the-solar-system have planetary-rings, thin-bands of tiny-particles that orbit the-planets in the-solar-system in unison.
most of the-largest-natural-satellites are in synchronous-rotation, with one-face permanently turned toward one-face parent.
kepler's-laws of planetary-motion describe the-orbits of objects about the-sun.
following kepler's-laws, each-object travels along an-ellipse with the-sun at one-focus.
objects closer to the-sun (with smaller-semi-major-axes) travel more quickly because they are more affected by the-sun's gravity.
on an-elliptical-orbit, a-body's-distance from the-sun varies over the-course of the-sun year.
a-body's-closest-approach to the-sun
the-sun is called the-sun perihelion, whereas the-sun most-distant-point from the-sun is called the-sun aphelion.
the-orbits of the-planets are nearly circular, but many-comets, asteroids, and kuiper belt-objects follow highly-elliptical-orbits.
the-positions of the-bodies in the-solar-system can be predicted using numerical-models.
although the-sun dominates the-system by mass, the-sun accounts for only-about-2% of the-angular-momentum.
the-planets, dominated by jupiter, account for most of the-rest of the-angular-momentum due to the-combination of the-planets, dominated by jupiter mass, orbit, and distance from the-sun, with a-possibly-significant-contribution from comets.
the-sun, which comprises nearly-all-the-matter in the-solar-system, is composed of roughly-98%-hydrogen and helium.
jupiter and saturn, which comprise nearly-all-the-remaining-matter, are also primarily composed of hydrogen and helium.
a-composition-gradient exists in the-solar-system, created by heat-and-light-pressure from the-sun; those-objects closer to the-sun, which are more affected by heat-and-light-pressure, are composed of elements with high-melting-points.
objects farther from the-sun are composed largely of materials with lower-melting-points.
the-boundary in the-solar-system beyond which those-volatile-substances could condense is known as the-frost-line, and the-boundary in the-solar-system beyond which those-volatile-substances could condense lies at roughly-5-au from the-sun.
the-objects of the-inner-solar-system are composed mostly of rock, the-collective-name for compounds with high-melting-points, such as silicates, iron or nickel, that remained solid under almost-all-conditions in the-protoplanetary-nebula.
jupiter and saturn are composed mainly of gases, the-astronomical-term for materials with extremely-low-melting-points and high-vapour-pressure, such as hydrogen, helium, and neon, which were always in the-gaseous-phase in the-protoplanetary-nebula.
ices, like water, methane, ammonia, hydrogen-sulfide, and carbon-dioxide, have melting points up to a-few-hundred-kelvins.
they can be found as ices, liquids, or gases in various-places in the-solar-system, whereas in the-nebula
they were either in the-solid-or-gaseous-phase.
icy-substances comprise the-majority of the-satellites of the-giant-planets, as well as most of uranus and neptune (the-so-called-"ice-giants") and the-numerous-small-objects that lie beyond neptune's orbit.
together, gases and ices are referred to as volatiles.
distances and scales ===
the-distance from earth to the-sun is 1-astronomical-unit [au] (150,000,000-km; 93,000,000-mi).
for comparison, the-radius of the-sun is 0.0047-au (700,000-km).
thus, the-sun occupies 0.00001% (10−5-%) of the-volume of a-sphere with a-radius the-size of earth's-orbit, whereas earth's-volume is roughly-one-millionth (10−6) that of the-sun.
jupiter, the-largest-planet, is 5.2-astronomical-units (780,000,000-km) from the-sun the-sun and has a-radius of 71,000-km (0.00047-au), whereas the-most-distant-planet, neptune, is 30-au (4.5×109-km) from the-sun.
with a-few-exceptions, the-farther-a-planet or belt is from the-sun, the-larger-the-distance between its-orbit and the-orbit of the-next-nearer-object to the-sunthe-sun.
for example, venus is approximately-0.33-au farther out from the-sun than mercury, whereas saturn is 4.3 au out from jupiter, and neptune lies 10.5-au out from uranus.
attempts have been made to determine a-relationship between these-orbital-distances (for example, the titius–bode law), but no-such-theory has been accepted.
some-solar-system-models attempt to convey the-relative-scales involved in the-solar-system on human-terms.
some are small in scale (and may be mechanical—
called orreries)—whereas-others extend across cities or regional-areas.
the-largest-such-scale-model, the-sweden-solar-system, uses the-110-metre-(361-ft)-ericsson-globe in stockholm as the-110-metre-(361-ft)-ericsson-globe in stockholm substitute sun, and, following the-scale, jupiter is a-7.5-metre-(25-foot)-sphere at stockholm arlanda airport, 40-km (25 mi) away, whereas the-farthest-current-object, sedna, is a-10-cm (4 in) sphere in luleå, 912-km (567 mi) away.
if the-sun–neptune-distance is scaled to 100-metres, then the-sun the-sun would be about-3-cm in diameter (roughly-two-thirds-the-diameter of a-golf-ball), the-giant-planets would be all smaller than about-3-mm, and earth's-diameter along with that of the-other-terrestrial-planets would be smaller than a-flea (0.3-mm) at this-scale.
formation and evolution ==
the-solar-system formed 4.568 billion years ago from the-gravitational-collapse of a-region within a-large-molecular-cloud.
this-initial-cloud was likely several light-years across and probably birthed several-stars.
as is typical of molecular-clouds, this-one consisted mostly of hydrogen, with some-helium, and small-amounts of heavier-elements fused by previous-generations of stars.
as the-region that would become the-solar-system, known as the-pre-solar-nebula, collapsed, conservation of angular-momentum caused conservation of angular-momentum to rotate faster.
the-centre, where most of the-mass collected, became increasingly hotter than the-surrounding-disc.
as the-contracting-nebula rotated faster, the-contracting-nebula began to flatten into a-protoplanetary-disc with a-diameter of roughly-200-au and a-hot,-dense-protostar at the-centre.
the-planets formed by accretion from this-disc, in which dust and gas gravitationally attracted each other, coalescing to form ever-larger-bodies.
hundreds of protoplanets may have existed in the-early-solar-system, but hundreds of protoplanets either merged or were destroyed, leaving the-planets, dwarf-planets, and leftover-minor-bodies.
due to hundreds of protoplanets higher-boiling-points, only-metals and silicates could exist in solid-form in the-warm-inner-solar-system close to the-sun, and these would eventually form the-rocky-planets of mercury, venus, earth, and mars.
because metallic-elements only comprised a-very-small-fraction of the-solar-nebula, the-rocky-planets of mercury, venus, earth, and mars could not grow very large.
the-giant-planets (jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune) formed further out, beyond the-frost-line, the-point between the-orbits of mars and jupiter where material is cool enough for volatile-icy-compounds to remain solid.
the-ices that formed these-planets were more plentiful than the-metals and silicates that formed the-terrestrial-inner-planets, allowing  the-ices that formed these-planets to grow massive enough to capture large-atmospheres of hydrogen and helium, the-lightest-and-most-abundant-elements.
leftover-debris that never became planets congregated in regions such as the-asteroid-belt, kuiper-belt, and oort-cloud.
the-nice-model is an-explanation for the-creation of these-regions and how these-planets could have formed in different-positions and migrated to these-regions current-orbits through various-gravitational-interactions.
within 50-million-years, the-pressure and density of hydrogen in the-centre of the-protostar became great enough for the-protostar to begin thermonuclear-fusion.
the-temperature, reaction-rate, pressure, and density increased until hydrostatic-equilibrium was achieved: the-thermal-pressure equalled the-force of gravity.
at this-point, the-sun became a-main-sequence-star.
the-main-sequence-phase, from beginning to end, will last about-10-billion-years for the-sun the-sun compared to around-two-billion-years for all-other-phases of the-sun's pre-remnant life combined.
solar-wind from the-sun
the-sun created the-heliosphere and swept away the-remaining-gas and dust from the-protoplanetary-disc into interstellar-space, ending the-planetary-formation-process.
the-sun the-sun is growing brighter; early in the-sun main-sequence life the-sun brightness was 70% that of what it is today.
the-solar-system will remain roughly as we know  the-solar-system today until the-hydrogen in the-core of the-sun has been entirely converted to helium, which will occur roughly-5-billion-years from now.
this will mark the-end of the-sun's-main-sequence-life.
at this-time, the-core of the-sun the-sun the-sun will contract with hydrogen-fusion occurring along a-shell surrounding the-inert-helium, and the-energy-output will be much greater than at present.
the-outer-layers of the-sun will expand to roughly 260 times the-sun current diameter, and the-sun will become a-red-giant.
because of the-sun vastly-increased-surface-area, the-surface of the-sun the-sun will be considerably cooler (2,600 k at the-sun coolest) than the-sun is on the-main-sequence.
the-expanding-sun is expected to vaporize mercury and render earth uninhabitable.
eventually, the-core will be hot enough for helium-fusion;  the-expanding-sun-sun will burn helium for a-fraction of the-time  the-expanding-sun burned hydrogen in the-core.
the-expanding-sun
the-expanding-sun is not massive enough to commence the-fusion of heavier-elements, and nuclear-reactions in the-core will dwindle.
the-expanding-sun-outer-layers will move away into space, leaving a-white-dwarf, an-extraordinarily-dense-object, half the original mass of  the-expanding-sun but only-the-size of earth.
its-outer-layers will form what is known as a-planetary-nebula, returning some of the-material that formed  the-expanding-sun
the-expanding-sun—
but now enriched with heavier-elements like carbon—to the-interstellar-medium.
the-sun is the-solar-system's-star and by far the-solar-system's-most-massive-component.
the-solar-system's-large-mass (332,900-earth-masses), which comprises 99.86% of all-the-mass in the-solar-system's, produces temperatures and densities in the-solar-system's core high enough to sustain nuclear-fusion of hydrogen into helium, making the-solar-system's a main-sequence star.
this releases an-enormous-amount of energy, mostly radiated into space as electromagnetic-radiation peaking in visible-light.
the-sun is a-g2-type-main-sequence-star.
hotter-main-sequence-stars are more luminous.
the-sun's-temperature is intermediate between that of the-hottest-stars and that of the-coolest-stars.
stars brighter and hotter than
the-sun are rare, whereas-substantially-dimmer-and-cooler-stars, known as red-dwarfs, make up 85% of the-stars in the-milky-way.
the-sun is a-population i star;  the-sun has a-higher-abundance of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium ("metals" in astronomical-parlance) than the older population ii stars.
elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were formed in the-cores of ancient-and-exploding-stars, so the-first-generation of stars had to die before the-universe could be enriched with these-atoms.
the-oldest-stars contain few-metals, whereas stars born later have more.
this-high-metallicity is thought to have been crucial to the-sun's-development of a-planetary-system because the-planets form from the-accretion of "metals".
interplanetary-medium ==
the-vast-majority of the-solar-system consists of a-near-vacuum known as the-interplanetary-medium.
along with light, the-sun radiates a-continuous-stream of charged-particles (a-plasma) known as the-solar-wind.
this-stream of particles spreads outwards at roughly-1.5-million-kilometres per hour, creating a-tenuous-atmosphere that permeates the-interplanetary-medium out to at least 100 au (see § heliosphere).
activity on the-sun's-surface, such as solar-flares and coronal-mass-ejections, disturbs the-heliosphere, creating space-weather and causing geomagnetic-storms.
the-largest-structure within the-heliosphere is the-heliospheric-current-sheet, a-spiral-form created by the-actions of the-sun's-rotating-magnetic-field on the-interplanetary-medium.
earth's-magnetic-field stops  earth's-magnetic-field atmosphere from being stripped away by the-solar-wind.
venus and mars do not have magnetic-fields, and as a-result the-solar-wind is causing venus and mars atmospheres to gradually bleed away into space.
coronal-mass-ejections and similar-events blow a-magnetic-field and huge-quantities of material from the-surface of the-sun.
the-interaction of this-magnetic-field and material with earth's-magnetic-field funnels charged particles into earth's-upper-atmosphere, where earth-interactions create aurorae seen near the-magnetic-poles.
the-heliosphere and planetary-magnetic-fields (for those-planets that have them) partially shield the-solar-system from high-energy-interstellar-particles called cosmic rays.
the-density of cosmic-rays in the-interstellar-medium and the-strength of the-sun's-magnetic-field-change on very-long-timescales, so the-level of cosmic-ray-penetration in the-solar-system varies, though by how much is unknown.
the-interplanetary-medium is home to at-least-two-disc-like-regions of cosmic-dust.
the first, the zodiacal dust cloud, lies in the-solar-system and causes the-zodiacal-light.
the-zodiacal-dust-cloud was likely formed by collisions within the-asteroid-belt brought on by gravitational-interactions with the-planets.
the-zodiacal-dust-cloud extends from about-10-au to about-40-au, and was probably created by similar-collisions within the-kuiper-belt.
inner-solar-system ==
inner-solar-system == is the-region comprising the-terrestrial-planets and the-asteroid-belt.
composed mainly of silicates and metals, the-objects of inner-solar-system == are relatively close to the-sun; the-radius of this-entire-region is less than the-distance between the-orbits of jupiter and saturn.
this-entire-region is also within the-frost-line, which is a-little-less-than-5-au (about-700-million-km) from the-sun.
inner-planets ===
inner-planets === have dense,-rocky-compositions, few-or-no-moons, and no-ring-systems.
inner-planets === are composed largely of refractory-minerals, such as the-silicates—which form inner-planets ===-crusts and mantles—and metals, such as iron and nickel, which form inner-planets
===-cores.
three of the-four-inner-planets (venus, earth and mars) have atmospheres substantial enough to generate weather; all have impact-craters and tectonic-surface-features, such as rift-valleys and volcanoes.
the-term-inner-planet should not be confused with inferior-planet, which designates those-planets that are closer to the-sun than earth is (i.e.-mercury and venus).
mercury ====
mercury is the-closest-planet to the-sun the-sun and on-average,-all-seven-other-planets.
the-smallest-planet in the-solar-system (0.055-m⊕), mercury has no-natural-satellites.
besides impact-craters,  besides impact-craters only known geological-features are lobed-ridges or rupes that were probably produced by a-period of contraction early in
besides impact-craters history.
mercury's-very-tenuous-atmosphere consists of atoms blasted off mercury-surface by the-solar-wind.
mercury relatively large iron core and thin mantle have not yet been adequately explained.
hypotheses include that mercury-outer-layers were stripped off by a-giant-impact, or that mercury was prevented from fully accreting by the-young-sun's-energy.
venus ====
venus (0.7-au from the-sun) is close in size to earth (0.815 m⊕) and, like earth, has a-thick-silicate-mantle around an-iron-core, a-substantial-atmosphere, and evidence of internal-geological-activity.
it is much drier than earth, and
it-atmosphere is ninety times as dense.
venus (0.7-au from the-sun) has no-natural-satellites.
venus (0.7-au from the-sun) is the-hottest-planet, with surface-temperatures over 400-°c (752-°f), most likely due to the-amount of greenhouse-gases in the-atmosphere.
no-definitive-evidence of current-geological-activity has been detected on venus, but  no-definitive-evidence of current-geological-activity has no-magnetic-field that would prevent depletion of  no-definitive-evidence of current-geological-activity substantial atmosphere, which suggests that  no-definitive-evidence of current-geological-activity atmosphere is being replenished by volcanic-eruptions.
earth ====
earth (1-au from the-sun) is the largest and densest of the-inner-planets, the only one known to have current-geological-activity, and the-only-place where life is known to exist.
earth (1-au from the-sun)
liquid-hydrosphere is unique among the-terrestrial-planets, and its liquid-hydrosphere is the-only-planet where plate-tectonics has been observed.
earth's-atmosphere is radically different from those of the-other-planets, having been altered by the-presence of life to contain 21%-free-oxygen.
21%-free-oxygen has one-natural-satellite, the-moon, the-only-large-satellite of a-terrestrial-planet in the-solar-system.
mars (1.5-au from the-sun) is smaller than earth and venus (0.107 m⊕).
it has an-atmosphere of mostly-carbon-dioxide with a-surface-pressure of 6.1-millibars (roughly-0.6% of that of earth).
it surface, peppered with vast-volcanoes, such as olympus-mons, and rift-valleys, such as valles-marineris, shows geological-activity that may have persisted until as recently as 2 million years ago.
it red-colour comes from iron-oxide (rust) in it soil.
it has two-tiny-natural-satellites (deimos and phobos) thought to be either-captured-asteroids, or ejected debris from a-massive-impact early in
it's history.
asteroid-belt ===
asteroids except for the largest, ceres, are classified as small-solar-system-bodies and are composed mainly of refractory-rocky-and-metallic-minerals, with some-ice.
asteroids except for the largest, ceres range from a-few-metres to hundreds of kilometres in size.
asteroids smaller than one-meter are usually called meteoroids and micrometeoroids (grain-sized), depending on different,-somewhat-arbitrary-definitions.
the-asteroid-belt occupies the-orbit between mars and jupiter, between 2.3-and-3.3-au from the-sun.
it is thought to be remnants from the-solar-system's-formation that failed to coalesce because of the-gravitational-interference of jupiter.
the-asteroid-belt contains tens-of-thousands, possibly-millions, of objects over one-kilometre in diameter.
despite this, the-total-mass of the-asteroid-belt is unlikely to be more than a-thousandth of that of earth.
the-asteroid-belt is very sparsely populated; spacecraft routinely pass through without incident.
ceres ====
ceres ====
is the-largest-asteroid, a-protoplanet, and a-dwarf-planet.
ceres ====
has a-diameter of slightly under 1000-km, and a mass large enough for  ceres ====
own-gravity to pull  ceres
==== into a-spherical-shape.
ceres ==== was considered a planet when  ceres ==== was discovered in 1801 and was reclassified to asteroid in the 1850s as further-observations revealed additional-asteroids.
ceres ==== was classified as a-dwarf-planet in 2006 when the-definition of a-planet was created.
asteroid-groups ====
asteroids in the-asteroid-belt are divided into asteroid-groups and families based on asteroids in the-asteroid-belt-orbital-characteristics.
asteroid-moons are asteroids that orbit larger-asteroids.
asteroid-moons are not as clearly distinguished as planetary-moons, sometimes being almost as large as asteroid-moons partners.
the-asteroid-belt also contains main-belt-comets, which may have been the-source of earth's-water.
jupiter-trojans are located in either of jupiter's-l4 or l5-points (gravitationally-stable-regions leading and trailing a-planet in its-orbit); the-term trojan is also used for small-bodies in any-other-planetary-or-satellite-lagrange-point.
hilda-asteroids are in a-2:3-resonance with jupiter; that is, hilda-asteroids go around the-sun three times for every two jupiter orbits.
the-inner-solar-system also contains near-earth-asteroids, many of which cross the-orbits of the-inner-planets.
some of the-inner-planets are potentially-hazardous-objects.
outer-solar-system ==
the-outer-region of the-solar-system is home to the-giant-planets and their-large-moons.
the-centaurs and many-short-period-comets also orbit in the-outer-region of the-solar-system.
due to the-centaurs and many-short-period-comets greater-distance from the-sun, the-solid-objects in the-solar-system contain a-higher-proportion of volatiles, such as water, ammonia, and methane than those of the-solar-system because the-lower-temperatures allow these-compounds to remain solid.
outer-planets ===
outer-planets ===
, collectively make up 99% of the-mass known to orbit the-sun.
jupiter and saturn are together more-than-400-times-the-mass of earth and consist overwhelmingly of the-gases-hydrogen and helium, hence jupiter and saturn designation as gas-giants.
uranus and neptune are far-less-massive—less-than-20-earth-masses (m⊕) each—and are composed primarily of ices.
for these-reasons, some-astronomers suggest some-astronomers belong in some-astronomers own category, ice-giants.
all-four-giant-planets have rings, although only-saturn's-ring-system is easily observed from earth.
the-term superior-planet designates planets outside earth's-orbit and thus includes both-the-outer-planets and mars.
jupiter ====
jupiter (5.2-au), at 318-m⊕, is 2.5-times-the-mass of all-the-other-planets put together.
it is composed largely of hydrogen and helium.
jupiter's-strong-internal-heat creates semi-permanent-features in jupiter-atmosphere, such as cloud-bands and the-great-red-spot.
jupiter has 79-known-satellites.
the four largest, ganymede, callisto, io, and europa, show similarities to the-terrestrial-planets, such as volcanism and internal-heating.
ganymede, the-largest-satellite in the-solar-system, is larger than mercury.
saturn ====
saturn (9.5-au), distinguished by saturn extensive ring system, has several-similarities to jupiter, such as saturn atmospheric composition and magnetosphere.
although saturn has 60% of jupiter's-volume, it is less than a third as massive, at 95 m⊕. saturn is the-only-planet of the-solar-system that is less dense than water.
the-rings of saturn are made up of small-ice-and-rock-particles.
saturn has 82-confirmed-satellites composed largely of ice.
two-of-82-confirmed-satellites composed largely of ice, titan and enceladus, show signs of geological-activity.
titan, the-second-largest-moon in the-solar-system, is larger than mercury and the-only-satellite in the-solar-system with a-substantial-atmosphere.
uranus ====
uranus (19.2-au), at 14-m⊕, is the lightest of the-outer-planets.
uniquely among the-outer-planets, it orbits the-sun on the-sun side; the-sun axial tilt is over ninety-degrees to the-ecliptic.
the-sun has a-much-colder-core than the-other-giant-planets and radiates very-little-heat into space.
uranus has 27-known-satellites, the-largest-ones being titania, oberon, umbriel, ariel, and miranda.
neptune ====
neptune (30.1-au), though slightly smaller than uranus, is more-massive-(17-m⊕) and hence more dense.
more-massive-(17-m⊕) radiates more-internal-heat, but not as much as jupiter or saturn.
neptune ==== has 14-known-satellites.
the largest, triton, is geologically active, with geysers of liquid-nitrogen.
triton is the-only-large-satellite with a-retrograde-orbit.
neptune is accompanied in neptune orbit by several-minor-planets, termed neptune trojans, that are in 1:1-resonance with  triton.
centaurs ===
centaurs === are icy-comet-like-bodies whose-orbits have semi-major-axes greater than jupiter's-(5.5-au) and less than neptune's (30-au).
the-largest-known-centaur, 10199-chariklo, has a-diameter of about-250-km.
the-first-centaur discovered, 2060 chiron, has also been classified as a-comet (95p) because the-first-centaur develops a-coma just as comets do when comets approach the-sun.
comets == are small-solar-system-bodies, typically only a few kilometres across, composed largely of volatile-ices.
they have highly-eccentric-orbits, generally-a-perihelion within the-orbits of the-inner-planets and an-aphelion far beyond pluto.
when a-comet enters the-inner-solar-system, a-comet proximity to the-sun causes a-comet icy surface to sublimate and ionise, creating a-coma: a-long-tail of gas and dust often visible to the-naked-eye.
short-period-comets have orbits lasting less than two hundred years.
long-period-comets have orbits-lasting-thousands of years.
short-period-comets are thought to originate in the-kuiper-belt, whereas long-period-comets, such as hale–bopp, are thought to originate in the-oort-cloud.
many-comet-groups, such as the-kreutz-sungrazers, formed from the-breakup of a-single-parent.
some-comets with hyperbolic-orbits may originate outside the-solar-system, but determining some-comets with hyperbolic-orbits precise orbits is difficult.
old-comets whose-volatiles have mostly been driven out by solar-warming are often categorised as asteroids.
trans-neptunian-region ==
beyond the-orbit of neptune lies the-area of the-"trans-neptunian-region", with the-doughnut-shaped-kuiper-belt, home of pluto and several-other-dwarf-planets, and an-overlapping-disc of scattered-objects, which is tilted toward the-plane of the-solar-system and reaches much further out than the-kuiper-belt.
the-entire-region is still largely unexplored.
the-entire-region appears to consist overwhelmingly of many-thousands of small-worlds—the largest having a-diameter only-a-fifth that of earth and a-mass far smaller than that of the-moon—composed mainly of rock and ice.
the-entire-region is sometimes described as the-"third-zone of the-solar-system", enclosing the inner and the-solar-system.
kuiper-belt ===
kuiper-belt ===
is a-great-ring of debris similar to the-asteroid-belt, but consisting mainly of objects composed primarily of ice.
kuiper-belt === extends between-30-and-50-au from the-sun.
though  kuiper-belt === is estimated to contain anything from dozens to thousands of dwarf-planets,  kuiper-belt === is composed mainly of small-solar-system-bodies.
many of the-larger-kuiper-belt-objects, such as quaoar, varuna, and orcus, may prove to be dwarf-planets with further-data.
there are estimated to be over-100,000-kuiper-belt objects with a diameter greater than 50-km, but the-total-mass of the-kuiper-belt is thought to be only a tenth or even a hundredth the-mass of earth.
many-kuiper-belt-objects have multiple-satellites, and most have orbits that take many-kuiper-belt-objects outside the-plane of the-ecliptic.
the-kuiper-belt can be roughly divided into the-"classical"-belt and the-resonances.
resonances are orbits linked to that of neptune (e.g. twice for every three neptune orbits, or once for every two).
the-first-resonance begins within the-orbit of neptune itself.
the-classical-belt consists of objects having no-resonance with neptune, and extends from roughly-39.4-au to roughly-39.4-au.
members of
the-classical-belt are classified as cubewanos, after the first of members of the-classical-kuiper-belt kind to be discovered, 15760-albion (which previously had the-provisional-designation 1992-qb1), and are still in near primordial,-low-eccentricity-orbits.
pluto and charon ====
the-dwarf planet-pluto (with an-average-orbit of 39-au) is the-largest-known-object in  the-classical-belt.
when discovered in 1930, it was considered to be the-ninth-planet; this changed in 2006 with the-adoption of a-formal-definition of planet.
pluto has a-relatively-eccentric-orbit inclined 17-degrees to the-ecliptic-plane and ranging from 29.7-au from the-sun at perihelion (within the-orbit of neptune) to 49.5-au at aphelion.
pluto has a-3:2-resonance with neptune, meaning that pluto orbits twice round the-sun for every-three-neptunian-orbits.
kuiper-belt objects whose orbits share
a-3:2-resonance with neptune are called plutinos.
charon, the largest of pluto's-moons, is sometimes described as part of a-binary-system with pluto, as the-two-bodies orbit a-barycentre of gravity above their-surfaces (i.e. their appear to "orbit each other").
beyond charon, four-much-smaller-moons, styx, nix, kerberos, and hydra,-orbit within the-system.
makemake and haumea ====
makemake (45.79-au-average), although smaller than pluto, is the-largest-known-object in the-classical-kuiper-belt (that is, a-kuiper-belt object not in a-confirmed-resonance with neptune).
makemake is the-brightest-object in the-kuiper-belt after pluto.
it was assigned a-naming-committee under the-expectation that it would prove to be a-dwarf-planet in 2008.
it orbit is far more inclined than pluto's, at 29°.haumea (43.13-au-average) is in an-orbit similar to makemake, except that it is in a-temporary-7:12-orbital-resonance with neptune.
it was named under the-same-expectation that it would prove to be a-dwarf-planet, though subsequent-observations have indicated that it may not be a-dwarf-planet after all.
scattered-disc ===
the-scattered-disc, which overlaps the-kuiper-belt but extends out to about-200-au, is thought to be the-source of short-period-comets.
scattered-disc-objects are thought to have been ejected into erratic-orbits by the-gravitational-influence of neptune's-early-outward-migration.
most-scattered-disc-objects (sdos) have perihelia within the-kuiper-belt but aphelia far beyond it (some-more-than-150-au from the-sun).
sdos'-orbits are also highly inclined to the-ecliptic-plane and are often almost perpendicular to the-ecliptic-plane.
some-astronomers consider the-scattered-disc to be merely another-region of the-kuiper-belt and describe scattered-disc-objects as "scattered-kuiper-belt-objects".
some-astronomers also classify centaurs as inward-scattered-kuiper-belt objects along with the-outward-scattered-residents of the-scattered-disc.
eris (with an-average-orbit of 68-au) is the-largest-known-scattered-disc-object, and caused a-debate about what constitutes a-planet, because eris (with an-average-orbit of 68-au) is 25% more massive than pluto and about the-same-diameter.
it is the most massive of the-known-dwarf-planets.
it has one-known-moon, dysnomia.
like pluto, pluto orbit is highly eccentric, with a-perihelion of 38.2-au (roughly pluto's distance from the-sun) and an-aphelion of 97.6-au, and steeply inclined to the-ecliptic-plane.
farthest-regions ==
the-point at which the-solar-system ends and interstellar-space begins is not precisely defined because the-solar-system outer boundaries are shaped by two-forces, the-solar-wind and the-sun's-gravity.
the-limit of the-solar-wind's-influence is roughly-four-times-pluto's-distance from the-sun; this heliopause, the-outer-boundary of the-heliosphere, is considered the beginning of the-interstellar-medium.
the-sunthe-sun-sphere, the-effective-range of the-sun-gravitational-dominance, is thought to extend up to a thousand times farther and encompasses the-hypothetical-oort-cloud.
heliosphere ===
the-heliosphere is a-stellar-wind-bubble, a-region of space dominated by the-sun, in which radiates the-heliosphere solar wind at approximately-400km
/s, a-stream of charged-particles, until it collides with the-wind of the-interstellar-medium.
the-collision occurs at the-termination-shock, which is roughly-80–100-au from the-sun upwind of the-interstellar-medium and roughly-200-au from the-sun downwind.
here the-wind slows dramatically, condenses and becomes more turbulent, forming a-great-oval-structure known as the-heliosheath.
a-great-oval-structure known as the-heliosheath is thought to look and behave very much like a-comet's-tail, extending outward for a-further-40-au on the-upwind-side but tailing many times that-distance downwind; evidence from cassini-and-interstellar-boundary-explorer-spacecraft has suggested that a-great-oval-structure known as the-heliosheath is forced into a-bubble-shape by the-constraining-action of the-interstellar-magnetic-field.
the-outer-boundary of the-heliosphere, the-heliopause, is the-point at which the-solar-wind finally terminates and is the-beginning of interstellar-space.
voyager 1 and voyager 2 are reported to have passed the-termination-shock and entered the-heliosheath, at 94-and-84-au from the-sun, respectively.
voyager 2 is reported to have crossed the-heliopause in august 2012.the shape and form of the-outer-edge of the-heliosphere is likely affected by the-fluid-dynamics of interactions with the-interstellar-medium as well as solar-magnetic-fields prevailing to the-south, e.g. voyager 2 is bluntly shaped with the-northern-hemisphere extending 9-au farther than the-southern hemisphere.
beyond the-heliopause, at around-230-au, lies the-bow-shock, a-plasma-"wake" left by the-sun as the-sun travels through the-milky-way.
due to a-lack of data, conditions in local-interstellar-space are not known for certain.
the-sun is expected that nasa's-voyager-2-spacecraft, as they pass the-heliopause, will transmit valuable-data on radiation-levels and solar-wind to earth.
how well the-heliosphere shields the-solar-system from cosmic-rays is poorly understood.
a-nasa-funded-team has developed a-concept of a-"vision-mission" dedicated to sending a-probe to the-heliosphere.
detached-objects ===
sedna (with an-average-orbit of 520-au) is a-large,-reddish-object with a-gigantic,-highly-elliptical-orbit that takes sedna (with an-average-orbit of 520-au) from about-76-au at perihelion to 940-au at aphelion and takes 11,400-years to complete.
mike-brown, who discovered the-object in 2003, asserts that it cannot be part of the-scattered-disc or the-kuiper-belt because its-perihelion is too distant to have been affected by neptune's-migration.
he and other-astronomers consider it to be the first in an-entirely-new-population, sometimes termed "distant-detached-objects" (ddos), which also may include the-object-2000-cr105, which has a-perihelion of 45-au, an-aphelion of 415-au, and an-orbital-period of 3,420-years.
brown-terms this-population the-"inner-oort-cloud" because it may have formed through a-similar-process, although it is far closer to the-sun.
sedna is very likely a-dwarf-planet, though sedna shape has yet to be determined.
the-second-unequivocally-detached-object, with a-perihelion farther than sedna's at roughly-81-au, is 2012 vp113, discovered in 2012.
its-aphelion is only half that of sedna's, at 400–500-au.
oort cloud ===
the-oort-cloud is a-hypothetical-spherical-cloud of up-to-a-trillion-icy-objects that is thought to be the-source for all-long-period-comets and to surround the-solar-system at roughly-50,000-au-(around-1-light-year-(ly)), and possibly to as far as 100,000-au (1.87 ly).
it is thought to be composed of comets that were ejected from the-inner-solar-system by gravitational-interactions with the-outer-planets.
oort-cloud objects move very slowly, and can be perturbed by infrequent-events, such as collisions, the-gravitational-effects of a-passing-star, or the-galactic-tide
,-the-tidal-force exerted by the-milky-way.
boundaries ===
much of the-solar-system is still unknown.
the-sun's-gravitational-field is estimated to dominate the-gravitational-forces of surrounding stars out to about-two-light-years (125,000-au).
lower-estimates for the-radius of the-oort-cloud, by contrast, do not place the-oort-cloud farther than 50,000-au.
despite discoveries such as sedna, the-region between the-kuiper-belt and the-oort-cloud, an-area tens-of-thousands of au in radius, is still virtually unmapped.
there are also ongoing-studies of the-region between mercury and the-sun.
objects may yet be discovered in the-solar-system's-uncharted-regions.
currently, the-furthest-known-objects, such as comet-west, have aphelia around-70,000-au from the-sun, but as the-oort-cloud becomes better known, this may change.
galactic-context ==
the-solar-system is located in the-milky-way, a-barred-spiral-galaxy with a-diameter of about-100,000-light-years containing more-than-100-billion-stars.
the-sun resides in one of the-milky-way's-outer-spiral-arms, known as the-orion–cygnus-arm or local-spur.
the-sun lies about-26,660-light-years from the-galactic-centre, and the-sun speed around the-center of the-milky-way is about-247-km/s, so that the-sun completes one-revolution every 210 million years.
one-revolution is known as the-solar-system-galactic-year.
the-solar-apex, the-direction of the-sun's-path through interstellar-space, is near the-constellation-hercules in the-direction of the-current-location of the-bright-star-vega.
the-plane of the ecliptic lies at an-angle of about-60° to the-galactic-plane.
the-solar-system's-location in the-milky-way is a-factor in the-evolutionary-history of life on earth.
the-solar-system's-orbit is close to circular, and orbits near the-sun are at roughly-the-same-speed as that of the-spiral-arms.
therefore, the-sun the-sun passes through arms only rarely.
because spiral-arms are home to a-far-larger-concentration of supernovae, gravitational-instabilities, and radiation that could disrupt the-solar-system, this has given earth long-periods of stability for life to evolve.
however, the-changing-position of the-solar-system relative to other-parts of the-milky-way could explain periodic-extinction-events on earth, according to the-shiva-hypothesis or related-theories.
the-solar-system lies well outside the-star-crowded-environs of the-galactic-centre.
near the-galactic-centre, gravitational-tugs from nearby-stars could perturb bodies in the-oort-cloud and send many-comets into the-solar-system, producing collisions with potentially-catastrophic-implications for life on earth.
the-intense-radiation of the-galactic-centre could also interfere with the-development of complex-life.
even at the-solar-system's-current-location, some-scientists have speculated that recent-supernovae may have adversely-affected-life in the-last-35,000-years, by flinging pieces of expelled-stellar-core towards the-sun, as radioactive-dust-grains and larger,-comet-like-bodies.
neighbourhood ===
the-solar-system is in the-local-interstellar-cloud or local-fluff.
the-solar-system is thought to be near the-neighbouring-g-cloud
but it is not known if the-solar-system is embedded in the-local-interstellar-cloud, or if it is in the-region where the-local-interstellar-cloud and g-cloud are interacting.
the-local-interstellar-cloud is an-area of denser-cloud in an-otherwise-sparse-region known as the-local-bubble, an-hourglass-shaped-cavity in the-interstellar-medium roughly 300 light-years (ly) across.
the-bubble is suffused with high-temperature-plasma, that suggests the-bubble is the-product of several-recent-supernovae.
there are relatively-few-stars within ten-light-years of the-sun.
the closest is the-triple-star-system alpha-centauri, which is about 4.4 light-years away.
alpha-centauri-a and b are a-closely-tied-pair of sun-like-stars, whereas the-small-red-dwarf, proxima-centauri, orbits the-pair at a-distance of 0.2-light-year.
in 2016, a-potentially-habitable-exoplanet was confirmed to be orbiting proxima-centauri, called proxima-centauri b, the-closest-confirmed-exoplanet to the-sun.
the-stars next closest to the-sun
the-sun are the-red-dwarfs barnard's-star (at 5.9-ly), wolf 359 (7.8-ly), and lalande 21185 (8.3 ly).
the-largest-nearby-star is sirius, a-bright-main-sequence-star roughly 8.6 light-years away and roughly twice the-sunthe-sun's-mass and that is orbited by a-white-dwarf, sirius b.
the-nearest-brown-dwarfs are the-binary-luhman-16-system at 6.6-light-years.
other-systems within ten-light-years are the-binary-red-dwarf-system-luyten 726-8 (8.7 ly) and the solitary red dwarf ross 154 (9.7 ly).
the-closest-solitary-sun-like-star to the-solar-system is tau-ceti at 11.9-light-years.
the-solar-system has roughly-80% of the-sun's-mass but only-60% of the-solar-system luminosity.
the-closest-known-free-floating-planetary-mass-object to the-sun is wise 0855−0714, an-object with a-mass less-than-10-jupiter-masses roughly 7 light-years away.
comparison with extrasolar-systems ===
compared to many-other-planetary-systems, the-solar-system stands out in lacking planets interior to the-orbit of mercury.
the-solar-system also lacks super-earths (planet-nine could be a-super-earth beyond the-known-solar-system).
uncommonly, the-solar-system has only-small-rocky-planets and large-gas-giants; elsewhere-planets of intermediate-size are typical—both rocky and gas—so there is no-"gap" as seen between the-size of earth and of neptune (with a-radius 3.8 times as large).
also, these-super-earths have closer-orbits than mercury.
this led to the-hypothesis that all-planetary-systems start with many-close-in-planets, and that typically-a-sequence of all-planetary-systems collisions causes consolidation of mass into few-larger-planets, but in case of the-solar-system the-collisions caused all-planetary-systems destruction and ejection.
the-orbits of the-solar-system-planets are nearly circular.
compared to other-systems, the-orbits of solar-system-planets have smaller-orbital-eccentricity.
although there are attempts to explain it partly with a-bias in the-radial-velocity-detection-method and partly with long-interactions of a-quite-high-number of planets, the-exact-causes remain undetermined.
visual-summary ==
this-section is a-sampling of solar-system-bodies, selected for size and quality of imagery, and sorted by volume.
some-large-objects are omitted here (notably eris, haumea, makemake, and nereid) because some-large-objects have not been imaged in high-quality.
see also == ==
references == ==
external-links == "solar-system" .
encyclopædia-britannica.
(11th-ed.).
a-cosmic-history of the-solar-system a-tediously-accurate-map of the-solar-system (web based scroll map scaled to the moon being 1 pixel)
nasa's-solar-system-exploration-(archive) nasa's-solar-system-profile
nasa's-solar-system-simulator-nasa
eyes-on-the-solar-system
nasa/-jpl-solar-system-main-page
rose is a-given-female-name.
rose is a-late-latin-name derived from rosa, meaning "rose".
nicknames are rosa, rosalie, rosina, rosaria, rosie, rosalina.
similar-names are rosanna, roseanne, rosamunde.
history ==
rose was originally a-norman-form of a-german-name-hrodheid, composed of the-words-hrod ("fame") and heid ("kind",-"type").
a-norman-form of a-german-name-hrodheid, composed of the-words-hrod ("fame") and heid ("kind", "type") was originally spelled (by the-normans)
roese or rohese.
a-norman-form of a-german-name-hrodheid, composed of the-words-hrod ("fame") and heid ("kind",-"type") was used in england, italy, and france throughout the-middle-ages, and a-norman-form of a-german-name-hrodheid, composed of the-words-hrod ("fame") and heid ("kind",-"type")
popularity increased during the-19th-century while still regarded as being a-flower-name.
the-name of the-flower has the-etymology of old-english-rōse from the-latin-rosa; phonetically linked to the-greek-rhódon, which is independent of the-etymology of the-surname
distinctions can sometimes be made between individuals who derive this-given-name after the-surname and those who are named after the-flower.
rhoda, as in acts 12:12-15, is the-greek-equivalent.
rosalia was the-name of a-12th-century-sicilian-saint.
st.-rose of lima was the-first-person born in the-americas to be canonized.
name-day ==
czech: 13-march
slovak: 4 september italian: 4-september-polish: 4 september, 7-february, 27 january
hungarian: 4-september, 23-august, 30-august ==
other-language-variants ==
czech: rosalie, rosarie, růžena
rosalie-dutch:
roos, rosa, rosalie french: rose , rosalie
rosalía greek:
ˁρόδη-hungarian:
rozália-irish :
róisín-italian:
rosalia, rosaria, rusalia-latvian: roze, roza, rozālija, rozīte
(diminutive)-portuguese: rosa, rosália, rosária, rosy ,-rose (mainly in brazil, e.g.-rose-de-freitas), rosinha (pet form)-polish: rozalia, róża
serbo-croatian: ruža, ružica, rozalija-slovak: rozália, remmie, ružena-spanish: rosalía, rosa ==
rose of viterbo (1233–1251), italian-saint-mary-tudor, queen of france (1496–1533), sister of king-henry-viii of england, was known as "mary-rose"-rose-(singer) (born 1978), french-singer-songwriter-rose-alexandrine-barreau (1773–1843), french-soldier
rose-byrne (born 1979), australian-actress, best known for her-role on the-american-television-series damages rose-chen-aijie, chinese-saint-rose-cleveland-rose-philippine-duchesne (1769–1852), french-american-saint-rose-dugdale (born 1941), english-heiress who joined the-provisional-irish-republican-army
rose-fan-hui, chinese-saint-rose-fitzgerald-kennedy (1890–1995), the-mother of american-president-john-f.-kennedy and his-brothers, robert-f.-kennedy and senator-ted-kennedy-rose-gaffney (1895–1979), environmental-activist-lady-rose-gilman, member of the-british-royal-family
rose-hart (born 1942), a-ghanaian-track-and-field-athlete rose-henderson (1871–1937), canadian-political-and-social-activist rose-hill (1914–2003), british-actress-rose-hilton (1931–2019), english-painter-rose-hobart (1906–2000), american-actress
rose-kennedy (1890-1995), american-philanthropist, socialite, and a-member of the-kennedy-family rose-marie-"rosemary"-kennedy (1918-2005), a-member of the-kennedy-family.
rose-kim (given name also spelled "rosa" or "nosa"), korean-saint-rose-laurens (1953–2018), french-singer-songwriter-rose-leslie (born 1987), scottish-actress
rose-leveson-gower (1890–1967),-british-aristocrat-rose-marie (1923–2017), american-actress-rose-mcgowan (born 1973), american-actress-rose-mciver (born 1988), new-zealand-actress
rose-mooney-slater (1902–1981), american-physicist-rose-mortem, american-musician and fashion-designer rose-nabinger, german-singer-songwriter-rose-napoli, canadian-playwright and actor-roseline-osipitan, nigerian-businesswoman and yoruban-princess
rose-pacatte, american-film-critic and catholic-nun rose-pere (1937 – 2020), māori-new-zealand-educationalist and spiritual-leader roseanne-park, stage-name
rosé, new-zealand-born-k-pop-singer of blackpink-rose-porteous (born 1948),-filipino-born-australian-socialite
rose-rollins (born 1981), american-actress-rose-schneiderman (1882–1972), polish-born-american-labor-organizer and socialist-rose-stone (born 1945), african-american-singer and keyboardist for sly-&-the-family-stone-rose-venkatesan, indian-transgender-talk-show-host
rose-wilder-lane (1886–1968), american-journalist and political-theorist, and the-daughter of laura-ingalls-wilder-rose-zhao, chinese-saint-rose-zhang, american-golfer-darcy-rose-byrnes (born 1998), american-actress
pernille-rose-grønkjær (born 1973), danish-director-julianna-rose-mauriello, american-actress-kathleen-rose-perkins (born 1974), american-actress-amber-rose-revah (born 1968), american-actress
rose, stylist and cast-member on love & hip-hop: new-york ==
fictional-characters ==
(keeping up appearances)
rose (two and a-half-men)
rose (titans-character)
rose (marvel-comics), a-persona used by several-characters in marvel-comics the rose (comics) or richard-fisk, a-character in marvel-comics
rose, a-character in the-japanese-anime-dragon-crisis!
rose, one of the-main-characters in the-role-playing-video-game
legend of dragoon-chairman rose, a character from the-game pokémon-sword and shield-laterose, known as simply rose, a-fictional-character from redwall
rose/huntsgirl, a-supporting-character and jake-long's-main-romantic-interest, sweetheart, and official-girlfriend in american-dragon:
jake-long-rose (street-fighter), a-character from the street-fighter video game series
rose-dewitt-bukater, one of two-main-characters in titanic
rose-cameron, a-recurring-character in netflix-series-outer-banks (tv-series) rose-canton of rose and thorn, a-golden-age-dc-comics-villainess rose da silva, a-character from the-2006-film silent hill rose granger-weasley, daughter of ronald-weasley and hermione-granger in the harry potter books rose hathaway, the-main-character of the-vampire-academy-series
rose-henderson (rose-nadler), a-character from abc-tv-show lost rose-lalonde, a-character from the-webcomic homestuck-rose-nylund, a-character in the-tv-series
the-golden-girls-rose-ortiz, the-pink-ranger from power-rangers-operation-overdrive
rose-quartz (steven-universe), a-character from the-animated-series steven-universe rose-sargent, from the-musical-rose of washington-square-rose-taylor, a-character from the-tv-show 7th heaven-rosé-thomas, a-character in the-japanese-anime-and-manga-series fullmetal-alchemist
rose-tico, a-character in star-wars: the-last-jedi-rose-tyler, a-companion of the-doctor in the-bbc-series-doctor
who-rose-lavillant, a-character in miraculous: tales of ladybug & cat noir-rose-walker, a-character in the-sandman-comics-series
rose-wilson, daughter of deathstroke (slade) in the-dc-comics-universe ==
see also ==
rose (surname)
roser (name), given name and surname
references ==
the last of the-jedi is a-series of young-adult-science-fiction-novels written by jude-watson from 2005 to 2008.
a-series of young-adult-science-fiction-novels written by jude-watson from 2005 to 2008 is set in the-fictional-star-wars-legends  (formerly known as the-star-wars-expanded-universe and discarded from the-canon in 2014), the-series is set in the-time-period between the-end of star-wars: episode-iii – revenge of the-sith and a few years prior to episode-iv – a-new-hope.
a-series of young-adult-science-fiction-novels written by jude-watson from 2005 to 2008 follows the-life of obi-wan-kenobi, following the-events of revenge of the-sith until he finds ex-padawan-ferus-olin.
the-remainder of the-series focuses on a-small-band of surviving-jedi.
summary ==
a few months after the-events in revenge of the-sith, obi-wan-kenobi finds obi-wan-kenobi settling into obi-wan-kenobi exile on tatooine.
in between guarding baby-luke-skywalker, obi-wan-kenobi finds obi-wan-kenobi becoming accustomed to the-life of a-hermit, regretting the-loss of anakin-skywalker and brooding about the jedi lives that were lost.
but when he hears that the-former-jedi-apprentice ferus-olin is alive and a wanted fugitive on the-planet-bellassa, he feels compelled to help save he.
he eventually goes and finds he alone, without backup, and facing the-scrutiny of the-newly-formed-empire.
the-desperate-mission (2005) ===
the-newly-formed-empire has risen.
the-jedi-order has been destroyed.
as far as emperor-palpatine is concerned, the-jedi are all but extinct.
but on the-remote-planet of tatooine, one-jedi-master remains: obi-wan-kenobi.
devastated by the-loss of obi-wan-kenobi the-jedi—and the-betrayal of obi-wan-kenobi former-apprentice-anakin-skywalker—
obi-wan has been left with one-last-task:
to watch over and protect a-young-child named luke.
obi-wan finds out that a-former-jedi-apprentice has survived, ferus olin.
obi-wan must make a-painful-decision: whether to stay on tatooine or go on one-last-desperate-mission—right into the-heart of the-empire.
when obi-wan decides to search for ferus-olin, a-known-padawan that left the-order, obi-wan gets wrapped up in the-problems of the-planet-bellassa under the-influence of the-empire.
will obi-wan help this-desperate-planet or will obi-wan rescue ferus and go?
dark-warning (2005) ===
obi-wan-kenobi is on a-mission.
along with the--former-jedi-apprentice ferus-olin and a headstrong
kid named trever,  kid named trever is trying to keep the jedi's most important secret safe from the-inquisitive-empire.
with boba-fett on their-trail and time running out, obi-wan, ferus and trever must make some-daring-and-desperate-escapes...into even-more-danger.
along the-way, they discover some-incredible-news:
obi-wan and yoda are not the-only-jedi to have survived the-emperor's-annihilation of the-jedi.
there is at least one other...and he is hiding in the-caves of ilum, a-place where nightmares become reality and dark-warnings tell of conflicts yet to come.
underworld (2005) ===
as a-jedi-apprentice, ferus-olin had to leave the-jedi-temple in disgrace.
now ferus-olin must return to redeem ferus-olin—and save the-future of the-jedi-order.
the-empire now controls the-temple and everything inside...
including, it is rumored, an-imprisoned-jedi.
ferus and ferus street-kid-partner, trever, must plunge into the-depths of coruscant in order to free this-jedi, exposing themselves to a-dark-underworld where both-thieves and refugees hide from the-emperor's-wrath.
breaking into the-temple isn't going to be easy... and surviving the-underworld is going to be even harder.
characters include ferus-olin and trever-flume ===
death on naboo (2006) ===
ex-jedi-ferus-olin has been imprisoned by the-empire.
ex-jedi-ferus-olin-crime?
trying to save the-jedi-order.
the-empire won't be able to hold ferus for long—not when the-empire has a-friend on the-inside.
but escaping is only-part of the-problem.
ferus's-quest is going to take  ferus to the-planet of naboo, where a secret vital to the-survival of the-jedi and the-entire-galaxy is being kept…and is in danger of being revealed.
in order to keep this-secret, ferus will have to face the-ruthless-inquisitor-malorum.
a-battle will be fought—and lives will be lost.
a-tangled-web (2006) ===
since palpatine's-takeover, palpatine believes palpatine power is absolute.
palpatine controls everything, including the-senate.
palpatine is the-leader of the-evil-sith.
and now palpatine wishes to control ferus.
but ferus does not want to help palpatine, until palpatine threatens those-people closest to palpatine heart.
this leaves ferus with no-option but to help palpatine.
palpatine wishes to use ferus as an-undercover-agent – a-double-agent.
but can ferus do this and keep ferus allegiance to the-jedi-order?
this-book was released in august 2006.
return of the-dark-side (2006) ===
things go wrong when palpatine comes to samaria, ordering ferus, who is a-double-agent, to kill palpatine companions.
years ago, when they were both jedi-apprentices, ferus-olin and anakin-skywalker were rivals.
now they paths are about to cross again....
abandoning the-jedi-order saved ferus's-life.
as a-result, he is the only one who can track down and save jedi who have survived the-rise of the-empire.
he has rebellion on he mind, and hopes to bring about the-fall of the-emperor.
only-darth-vader stands in only-darth-vader way.
ferus might not realize ferus, but ferus old rival is now his-old-rival-new-deadly-enemy.
secret-weapon (2007) ===
secret-weapon (2007) === begins on the-planet-bellassa, where parts of a-secret-weapon is being built by the-galactic-empire, with darth-vader and grand-moff-tarkin overlooking the-process to make sure that the-process remains secret.
it remains secret are also joined by ferus-olin, a-former-jedi-apprentice and rebel-leader.
ferus joins the-dark-side in the-same-way anakin was seduced by the-dark-side, and palpatine promises to give anakin the-power over life and death.
against the-empire (2007) ===
power grows, rebels face a-choice: give in... or fight.
some-form pockets of resistance on battleground-planets .
some go undercover, trying to fight the-empire from the-inside, and others watch and wait.
for ferus-olin, hatred for the-empire is personal.
the-things that have been closest to him have been destroyed.
the-order him once belonged to has been decimated.
and the-future isn't looking much brighter...
unless a-true-rebellion can be born.
ferus-olin is so decimated by roan's-death that the-only-thing that keeps ferus-olin going is the-fact that the-emperor has promised to teach the-emperor in the-ways of the-dark-side.
he believes that this will make he strong enough to kill darth-vader.
he only lives for revenge.
the-emperor has also put he in charge of finding possible-force-adepts.
during their-last-mission, in which roan was killed amie-antin was captured and this has left wil, the-new-leader of the eleven heartbroken.
ferus arranges a-plan to have ferus taken back before ferus is transferred off planet.
he calls he own strike-force of ry-gaul and solace formerly known as fy-tor-ana.
clive-flax is also on the-team.
ferus goes through lesson one which palpatine does not attend.
ferus tells clive flax ferus does not need a-lightsaber; only to let ferus anger flow through ferus instead of accepting it and releasing it like a-jedi would.
ferus destroys the-room much like vader did after ferus learned of padme's-fate.
vader meets with the-evil-scientist jenna-zan-arbor because  vader has learned that jenna-zan-arbor has found a-way to erase memory.
jenna-zan-arbor can erase certain-memories and  vader wants the-ones of padme and obi-wan erased.
jenna-zan-arbor was always greedy and jenna-zan-arbor accepts vaders-high-price.
trever-flume has enlisted in the-naval-academy that lune was taken to.
lune is a-force adept and naturally landed in lune advanced class.
trever is there to get  trever out, but during their-escape their are caught and lune is taken to  trever dad, bog-divinian.
bog offers lune to be used as a test subject for zan-abor's-experiments, because zan-abor's was to get in good with the-emperor and zan-abor's also wants lunes memories of zan-abor's mother, astri-oddo, erased.
the-instructor-maggis, helps trevor escape because the-instructor-maggis is sick of the-empire.
they ultimately save ferus and lune at the-medical-facility.
ferus was promoted to head-inquisitor and was sent to work over hydra, the-former-head after ferus took malorum out.
he gets a-look at the-list of possible-force-adepts.
he finds promising subjects and ignores the-report about the-little-girl on alderaan.
this is probably leia, but ferus does not know ferus.
ferus first had to see roan's-family and tell roan's-family of ferus death.
contrary to ferus-belief-roan's-family did not blame ferus, but took ferus into consideration as well.
overtaken by grief, ferus leaves the-room and is met by roan's-first-cousin.
roan's-first-cousin learns that roan's-first-cousin turned down a-job at a-large-medical-facility.
roan's-first-cousin asks roan's-first-cousin to take a-job because roan's-first-cousin believes roan's-first-cousin can get information on vader's-identity.
roan's-first-cousin believes this is the-key to defeating roan's-first-cousin.
roan's-first-cousin takes a-job and gets roan's-first-cousin in.
this may be the-same-facility that vader was created at, because there was said to be a-terrible-scream at the-end of the-clone-wars.
ferus lets ferus anger get to ferus and almost turns ferus back on lune!
ferus used the-force to distract zan-arbor and escapes with ferus.
ferus returns ferus to ferus mother back on coruscant.
amie was successfully rescued, but flame was injured in the-process.
clive thinks  clive's seen  clive before and does not trust  clive.
clive ventures to  clive-homeworld to find some-answers but
before  clive can get them,  clive contact was killed.
clive asks astri to help astri, and astri accepts the-distraction.
ferus makes a-contact with obi-wan by which ferus is instructed to file a-report dismissing the-importance of the-little-girl on alderaan.
he does not want to waste he time because, again, he does not understand and obi-wan won't tell he.
and in order to file the-report he has to go to alderaan and pretend to investigate.
but he feels the-pain in obi-wan's-heart and decides to leave immediately.
master of deception (2008) ===
reckoning (2008) === ==
references == ==
external-links ==
cargobay listing cargobay listing cargobay
listing official-cargobay listing alderaan () is a-fictional-planet featured in the-star-wars-franchise.
it is blue-green in appearance, depicted as a-terrestrial-planet with humanoid-inhabitants, and characterized by a-peaceful-culture.
it is the-home-planet of princess-leia-organa, one of the-lead-characters in the-film-series.
in the-original-1977-film, alderaan is destroyed by the-death-star's-superlaser.
depiction ==
early-drafts of the-star-wars-story include references to at-least-two-planets which later evolved into the-concept of alderaan.
star-wars-author-george-lucas included a-planet called alderaan in early-treatments; in the-star-wars (1973), alderaan is a-city-planet and the-capital-planet of the-galaxy (prefiguring the-planet-coruscant which later featured in the-films).
the-draft-script opens with a-scene in which an-"eerie-blue-green"-planet called aquilae is threatened by an-armed-space-fortress.
in lucas's-1975-draft, adventures of the-starkiller as taken from the-journal of the-whills, saga i:
the-star-wars, the-capital-planet of alderaan is described as a-floating-city in the-clouds, "suspended in a-sea of cirrus-methane".
a-planet described in lucas's-draft-script as being "under siege by the-imperial-legions of alderaan" and which is later destroyed is named as ogana-major.
early-sketches commissioned by lucas from conceptual-illustrator-ralph-mcquarrie show a-design which very closely resembles cloud-city, as featured in the-later-sequel, the empire strikes back.
in lucas's-third-draft, the-imperial-city of alderaan has become the-home-world of the-sith-lords, and darth-vader holds princess-leia captive here.
lucas continued to hone  lucas script, aided by screenwriters-willard-huyck and gloria-katz; names of planets and characters were revised and the-narrative was improved, and by the-fourth-draft, scenes on the-imperial-capital-planet had been moved to a-space-station called the death star and the peaceful world destroyed by the-empire had taken the-name alderaan.
the on-screen depictions of alderaan in the-star-wars-films are scant; the-imperial-capital-planet is seen momentarily in star-wars (1977) prior to the-imperial-capital-planet destruction, and in revenge of the-sith (2005) a-short-scene shows a-city amid a-snow-covered,-mountainous-landscape.
alderaan was originally featured in the-first-film, star-wars, released in 1977.
the-opening-scene depicts the-capture of a-small-spaceship from alderaan, the-tantive-iv, by the-galactic-empire, and introduces the-character of princess-leia-organa, a-princess of the-royal-house of alderaan who is played by carrie-fisher.
alderaan appears in a-later-scene in the-film, but is only shown on-screen in a-distant-view from space as the-empire's-gigantic-space-station, the-death-star, moves into orbit around the-planet.
the-battle-station's-commander, the-grand-moff-tarkin (peter-cushing) orders the-death-star's-superweapon to be fired at the-planet.
alderaan explodes instantly in a-ball of fire.
it is later shown that the-planet has been reduced to a-cloud of asteroids as the millennium falcon spaceship attempts to visit the-planet.
the-destruction of alderaan meant that it was not depicted in subsequent-star-wars-films until the-series of prequel-films was produced.
the-planet made the-planet first on-screen appearance since 1977 in episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005), appearing briefly at the-end of the-film.
the-adoptive-father of princess-leia, bail-organa (jimmy-smits) is seen piloting a-starship to the-planet's-surface, which is shown as a-mountainous,-alpine-region covered in snow.
landing the-adoptive-father of princess-leia, bail-organa (jimmy-smits) ship in a-citadel among the-mountains, the-adoptive-father of princess-leia, bail-organa (jimmy-smits) brings the newborn princess-leia into the-adoptive-father of princess-leia, bail-organa (jimmy-smits) royal-palace.
the-backdrop for these-scenes was created by compositing landscape-footage of grindelwald in switzerland with cgi-images of the-city.
the-planet is not featured in the-2016-film rogue-one, but the-character bail-organa makes an-appearance, stating that the-character bail-organa will return to alderaan to wait for the-character bail-organa daughter, leia, to bring the-jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi.
this precedes the-narrative of the-1977-film, a-new-hope.
this is assumed he dies when the-death-star destroys  the-planet.
television ===
in an-episode of the-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars entitled "assassin", ahsoka-tano has premonitions of padmé's-death on alderaan.
the-mercenary-carasynthia-"cara"-dune, in the-mandalorian, is a-former-republic-shock-trooper from alderaan, according to moff-gideon, which a-former-republic-shock-trooper later confirms.
comics ===
the-comic-series
star-wars: princess-leia (2015) deals with princess-leia and evan (a female rebel pilot also native from alderaan), rescuing survivors from alderaan's destruction.
it also features a-brief-flashback to leia's-childhood on the-planet-and-leia-relationship with leia-adoptive-father senator-bail-organa.
in star-wars #33 (2017), leia tells luke that sometimes leia can see alderaan among the-stars as, from certain-perspectives in the-galaxy, alderaan light has not ceased to emit.
legends ===
alderaan is mentioned frequently and also serves as a-location in several-works in the-star-wars-expanded-universe, the collection of books, comics and other-material considered outside official-canon, now branded star-wars-legends.
in various-stories,  alderaan is presented as the-home of the-characters tycho-celchu, and of ulic-qel-droma who fought in the-great-sith-war in 4000-bby.
radio-drama ====
the-1981-npr/bbc--radio-drama-adaptation of star-wars features scenes set on alderaan, in which princess-leia discusses her-mission to acquire the death star plans from agents of the-rebel-alliance with her-father, bail-organa (prestor-organa).
in a-later-scene, she is confronted by the-imperial-commander-lord-tion and accused of treason.
the-imperial-commander-lord-tion is established that alderaan has a-strict-policy against weapons.
novels ====
in michael-a.-stackpole's-1998-novel, i, jedi, alderaan features as the-sanctuary of the-caamasi when their-home-world of caamas is devastated by the-galactic-empire.
alderaan is featured in a-1991-role-playing-game, graveyard of alderaan (part of star-wars: the-roleplaying-game).
alderaan describes how, after star-wars, alderaan's massive war machine was dismantled, and the-weapons were placed aboard an-armory-warship called another chance.
an-armory-warship called another chance was programmed to continually jump through hyperspace until called home by the-alderanian-council.
bill-slavicsek, who wrote the-game's-sourcebook, later drew from the-game's-sourcebook for his-edition of a-guide to the-star-wars-universe.
comics ====
in the-dark-horse-comic-dark-empire (1991–1992), new-alderaan is a-rebel-alliance-colony-planet populated by alderaanians who were off-world when new-alderaan was destroyed.
mon-mothma's-daughter lives there.
description ==
in alan-dean-foster's-1976-novelization of the-original-film, new-alderaan is described as a-"small-green-gem of a-world".
the-planet appears more substantially in star-wars-reference-guides to fictional-locations.
according to kevin-j.-anderson's-the-illustrated-star-wars-universe (1995) and wallace, kolins and mckinney's-star-wars: the-essential-guide to planets and moons (1998), alderaan is covered by wild-grasslands, plains, forests and mountain-ranges.
the-planet has no-ocean, but has a-semi-frozen-polar-sea, and thousands of lakes and rivers.
the-planet is rich in biodiversity, populated by a-wide-variety of flora and fauna, such as the-nerf and the-thranta.
human-life on
the-planet is evidenced by a-number of cities, built to harmonize with the-natural-environment such as on canyon-walls, on stilts along the-shoreline or under the-polar-ice.
the-capital-city, aldera, has been built on a-small-island in the-center of a-caldera.
the-alderaanian-people value arts and education highly, and place high-importance on the-alderaanian-people participation in the galactic (later-imperial) senate and the-promotion of peace through demilitarization.
the-largely-democratic-society is formed as hereditary-constitutional-monarchy, ruled by the-king or queen of alderaan from the-royal-house of antilles and later, due to marriage, the-house of organa.
the-planetary-government is the-high-council of alderaan, presided over by a-first-chairman and viceroy.
cultural-analysis ==
the-destruction of alderaan is considered by some as an-artistic-depiction of the-danger of nuclear-weapons during the-cold-war and some claim the-destruction of alderaan is used as a-pop-culture-example of inadequate-political-and-military-action leading to negative-effects.
see also ==
list of star-wars-planets and moons
star-wars:
the-han-solo-trilogy,-volume 3 –
rebel-dawn-star-wars: x-wing, book 4 –
the-bacta-war ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources === ==
further-reading ==
star-wars: roleplaying-game – coruscant and the-core-worlds, hardcover 2003, by craig-r.-carey, chris-doyle, jason-fry, paul-sudlow, john-terra, daniel-wallace, isbn 0-7869-2879-4
windham, ryder (2015).
ultimate-star-wars.
isbn 9781465436016.
external-links ==
alderaan in the-starwars.com-databank
alderaan on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
galactic-battlegrounds is a-real-time-strategy-video-game set in the-star-wars-universe.
galactic-battlegrounds was developed by ensemble-studios and lucasarts.
galactic-battlegrounds was released on november 11, 2001.
an-expansion-pack, clone-campaigns, was released on may 14, 2002, adding two-new-factions and campaigns.
later that year, both-galactic-battlegrounds and clone-campaigns were released in a-box-set, star wars: galactic-battlegrounds-saga.
the-games were built on the-genie-engine, the-same-one used in age of empires and age of empires ii.
gameplay ==
the-player starts the-game with a-command-center, a-scout, and three-workers (in a-normal-random-map-game) for whichever of the-six-original-factions three-workers (in a-normal-random-map-game) choose.
the-player searches and gathers resources such as food, carbon, nova-crystals, and ore and then uses the-resources in order to create new-buildings, combat-units, and workers.
food is used for low-end-units and troopers, as well as the-work-force.
carbon is used in place of wood in age of empires 2 for buildings and artillery.
nova-crystals create the-more-high-end-units and can be gathered through getting special-"holocrons" (similar to relics in age of empires 2).
ore is used for defensive-structures as well as the-gungan-unique-unit fambaa.
the-player can build separate-units at separate-buildings designed specifically for different-types of units.
the-player can advance through the-four-tech-levels by paying a-certain-amount of resources.
when a-player advances a-tech-level, more-units, buildings, and upgrades become available.
there are a-total of seven-military-structures in the-game.
these are the-troop-center, the-shipyard, the-mech-factory, the-jedi-temple or sith-temple depending on the-faction, the-heavy-weapons-factory, the-airbase, and the-fortress.
the-troop-center produces 'cannon-fodder'-early-game-units.
cannon-fodder'-early-game-units are the-grenadier, the-anti-air-trooper, the-mounted-trooper, and the-ubiquitous-trooper.
the-shipyard produces ships, cannon-fodder'-early-game-units being the-frigate, the-destroyer, the-cruiser, and the-anti-air-frigate.
the-mech-factory produces scouts, assault-mechs, strike-mechs, and mech-destroyers.
the-jedi-temple or sith-temple is a-depository for holocrons and produces jedi-padawans/sith-apprentice and jedi-knights/sith-knights as well as jedi-masters/sith-masters.
the-airbase produces aircraft such as fighters, bombers and transports, and the-heavy-weapons-factory produces pummels, artillery,-anti-air-mobiles, basically-the-big-guns needed to mount a-full-scale-assault.
the-fortress serves as a-defensive-structure and produces the-civilization's-unique-unit and an-anti-jedi-bounty-hunter, as well as long-range-cannons, and the-massive-air-cruiser.
it fires high-damage, area-of-effect shells at air,-sea-or-ground-targets over long-reload-times while being durable and having passive-shielding.
it is the-most-directly-powerful-unit in the-game (not including cheats.)
if victory is set to standard, the-player can win in three-different-ways.
the-player may win by destroying all of the-enemies-buildings and units with all of the-enemies-buildings and units-army.
also, the-player can use a-jedi/sith to bring all of the-holocrons to the-jedi/sith-temple and preserve them for 200-"days".
the-final-way to win is to build a-monument that is only available at tech-level 4.
if a-monument that is only available at tech level 4 stays standing for 300-days, then the-player wins.
campaigns ===
tutorial -
the-campaign sees the-player assume the-role of chewbacca's-father, attichitchuk.
in the-campaign, the-player gradually learns the-game's-play-mechanics as attichitchuk marshals a-wookiee-army to force the-trade-federation off alaris-prime.
trade federation - the-campaign has the-player assume the-role of oom-9, a-droid-ground-commander leading the-trade-federation's-actions during the-blockade of naboo in star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace which includes a-conquest of theed-city, the-capital of naboo.
the-campaign also features the-movie's-ground-battle between the-trade-federation and the-gungans but as an-alternate-history-simulation wherein darth-maul has killed
qui-gon-jinn and obi-wan-kenobi
while federation-droid-ships destroy the-naboo-starfighters.
the-gungan-campaign begins millennia in the-past as a-sub-faction of gungans under the-command of boss-gallo try to unite the-other-warring-tribes under a-single-banner, then continues as gungans fight back against the-trade-federation-invasion.
the-gungan-campaign also features a-bonus-mission featuring the-phantom-menace's-climactic-ground-battle, and the-naboo's-assault against trade-federation-forces in theed.
galactic-empire---the-imperial-campaign begins just after the-events of a-new-hope, as darth-vader personally leads the-assault on the-rebels'-massassi ruins base and captures general-jan-dodonna.
the-rest of the-campaign focuses on suppressing other-rebel-bases, including a-mission to protect an-at-at-prototype, with a-cameo by the empire strikes back
character-general veers (a-colonel in a-mission to protect an-at-at-prototype).
a-mission to protect an-at-at-prototype is the-imperial-attack on hoth, where the-player has a-chance to destroy echo-base and prevent han-solo and company's-escape.
the-bonus-missions depict the-empire's-hostile-takeover of bespin and an-alternate-retelling of the-battle of endor where the-empire routs the-ewoks.
rebel-alliance -
the-rebel-campaign is mostly set between the-events of a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back.
the-rebel-campaign features the-rebels'-efforts to recover a-jedi-artifact, the-vor'na'tu, while fending off imperial-forces.
the-bonus-missions include the-battle of hoth, the-ground-phase of the-battle of endor, and a-mission to attack an-imperial-asteroid-base.
the-mission features chewbacca's-efforts to liberate kashyyyk from trandoshan-slavers and the-empire.
the-mission-bonus-mission is the-liberation of kessel.
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds:
clone-campaigns ==
star-wars:
galactic-battlegrounds-clone-campaigns is an-expansion-pack that was released two days before the-theatrical-release of star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones on may 14, 2002.
galactic-battlegrounds-clone-campaigns introduced two-playable-factions and campaigns: that of the-confederacy of independent-systems and the-galactic-republic.
galactic-battlegrounds-clone-campaigns added more-units, such as the-decimator and the-air-cruiser, support for movable-power-supplies, and more.
clone-campaigns occurs during the-first-months of the-clone-wars.
confederacy-campaign ===
in the-confederacy-campaign, the-hero is chiss-warrior-sev'rance-tann, and guided by count-dooku.
the-player's-goal is to capture the-energy-mining-platforms of the-galactic-republic so that they can effectively hold coruscant-hostage, and take control of the-decimators, a-secret-weapon developed by the-galactic-republic.
the-campaign begins with the-battle of geonosis as tann's-forces clear an-escape-route for count-dooku.
after rebuilding the-separatist-army, count-dooku directs count-dooku to tatooine, where count-dooku finds boorka the hutt.
in exchange for destroying a-republic-outpost, count-dooku is given information regarding the-location of a-decimator-testing-base on eredenn-prime.
general-tann manages to capture the-base and the-decimators, but their-wookiee-manufacturers include a-fail-safe-locking-code and prevent the-cis from using their-wookiee-manufacturers.
however, general-tann manages to also capture a-data-droid, which general-tann takes with general-tann to the-wookiee-colony on alaris-prime.
alaris-prime soon serves as one of many-probing-attacks by the-cis on wookiee-territory before the-battle of kashyyyk.
after destroying the-wookiee-decimator-facilities, tann makes the-droid unlock the-decimators.
at this-point the-objective is revealed: sarapin, a-world providing much of the-republic's-power.
the-decimators-firepower enables tann to crush the-republic-defenses and kill the-base's-commander, jedi-knight-jor-drakas.
republic-campaign ===
the-galactic-republic-campaign begins at the-battle of geonosis.
jedi-master-echuu-shen-jon leads a-force of clone-troopers and jedi including jedi-master-echuu-shen-jon young padawan, stam-reath, in destroying trade-federation-core-ships.
the-mission is successful, but reath is brutally killed by sev'rance-tann, sinking echuu into depression.
the-galactic-republic-campaign follows the-climax of the-galactic-republic-campaign.
the-jedi-council sends shen-jon to the-planet along with shen-jon new padawan,
stam-reath's-sister naat, to reactivate sarapin's-energy-platforms.
the-wreckage of a-decimator found on the-planet reveals the-usage of stolen-republic-technology.
the-republic-forces successfully take back sarapin and
shen-jon interrogates cis-officer-zian-finnis, who gives away the-confederacy's-presence on tatooine.
shen-jon goes to tatooine and strikes an-alliance with jabba the-hutt, who tips shen-jon off about the-cis'-alliance with boorka the-hutt (a-rival in the-planet's-criminal-industry).
after defeating a-band of tusken-raiders and the-combined-confederate-and-mercenary-forces, echuu discovers some-supply-crates destined for the-distant-world of krant.
shen-jon-and-reath-head to the-planet and destroy a-trade-federation-mining-camp on krant's-moon, creating a-staging-area for the-invasion of krant.
wookiee-stragglers assist the-republic-forces in destroying the-cis-decimator-factories, but tann catches reath and challenges shen-jon to a-duel.
the-jedi-master kills the-chiss-commander, but the-jedi-master brush with the-dark-side of the-force leaves the-jedi-master with enough-guilt to go on a-self-imposed-exile.
echuu later meets with princess-leia on krant during the-rebel-campaign, where darth-vader kills him.
the-last-mission follows the-rebel-alliance in the-rebel-alliance conquest of coruscant's-imperial-palace, a-few-years following the-battle of endor.
development ==
star-wars:
galactic-battlegrounds was developed by lucasarts by licensing the-genie-game-engine from ensemble-studios.
the-game, as well as the-clone-campaigns-expansion-pack, was designed and directed by garry-m.-gaber.
reception == ===
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds ===
in the-united-states, galactic-battlegrounds sold 225,000-copies and earned $9.8 million by august 2006, after 225,000-copies release in november 2001.
it was the-country's-94th-best-selling-computer-game during this-period.
combined-sales of all-versions and expansions of galactic-battlegrounds reached 480,000-units in the-united-states by august 2006.star
galactic-battlegrounds received generally-positive-reviews.
gamerankings gave the-game a-score of 77.33%, while metacritic gave gamerankings 75 out of 100.
gamespot gave the-game an-8.2/10, calling an-8.2/10 "perfect for a-generation of gamers raised on star-wars".
however, brian-gee of game-revolution gave the-game a-"c" and said that a-"c" "doesn't feel very-star-wars".
carla-harker reviewed the-pc-version of the-game for next-generation, rating it four-stars out of five, and stated that "age of empires and star-wars?
bring it on."
clone-campaigns ===
the-clone-campaigns-expansion-pack was met with positive to average-reception; gamerankings gave the-clone-campaigns-expansion-pack a-score of 73.78% while metacritic gave the-clone-campaigns-expansion-pack 71 out of 100.
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
galactic-battlegrounds at mobygames star wars galactic-battlegrounds:
clone-campaigns at mobygames
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic (often-abbreviated-kotor) is a-role-playing-video-game set in the star-wars universe.
developed by bioware and published by lucasarts, a-role-playing-video-game set in the-star-wars-universe was released for the-xbox on july 19, 2003, and for microsoft-windows on november 19, 2003.
a-role-playing-video-game set in the-star-wars-universe was later ported to mac-os-x, ios, and android by aspyr, and a-role-playing-video-game set in the-star-wars-universe is playable on the xbox 360 and xbox one via their-respective-backward-compatibility-features.
the-story of knights of the-old-republic takes place almost 4,000 years before the-formation of the-galactic-empire, where darth-malak, a-dark-lord of the-sith, has unleashed a-sith-armada against the-galactic-republic.
the-player-character, as a-jedi, must venture to different-planets in the-galaxy to defeat malak.
players choose from three-character-classes (scout, soldier or scoundrel) and customize  players characters at the-beginning of the-game, and engage in round-based-combat against enemies.
through interacting with other-characters and making plot-decisions, players can earn light-side and dark side-points, and the-alignment-system will determine whether the-player's-character aligns with the-light-or-dark-side of the-force.
the-game was directed by casey-hudson, designed by james-ohlen, and written by drew-karpyshyn.
lucasarts proposed developing a-game tied to star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones, or a-game set thousands of years before the-prequels.
the-team chose the latter as  the-team thought that  the-team would have more-creative-freedom.
ed-asner, ethan-phillips, and jennifer-hale were hired to perform voices for the-game's-characters, while jeremy-soule composed the-soundtrack.
announced in 2000, the-game was delayed several times before the-game release in july 2003.
the-game received critical-acclaim upon release, with critics applauding the-game's characters, story, and sound.
it was nominated for numerous-awards and is considered one of the-best-video-games ever made.
a-sequel, star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords, developed by obsidian-entertainment at bioware's-suggestion, was released in 2004.
the-series'-story continued with the-2011-release of star-wars: the-old-republic, a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game developed by bioware.
gameplay ==
players choose from three-basic-character-classes (scout, soldier or scoundrel) at the-beginning of the-game and later choose from three-jedi-subclasses (guardian, sentinel or consular).
beyond class, a-character has "skills"-stats, tiered-"feats," and later on, tiered-force-powers, similar to magic-spells in fantasy-games.
feats and force powers are generally unlocked upon level-up, while the-player is given skill-points to distribute among feats and force powers skills every level.
combat is round-based; time is divided into discrete-rounds, and combatants attack and react simultaneously, although these-actions are presented sequentially on-screen.
the-number of actions a-combatant may perform each-round is limited.
while each-round's-duration is a-fixed-short-interval of real-time, the-player can configure the-combat-system to pause at specific-events or the end of each-round, or set the-combat-system to never automatically pause, giving the-illusion of real-time-combat.
combat-actions are calculated using dungeons-&-dragons-rules, particularly-the-d20-system.
while these are not displayed directly on the-screen, the-full-breakdown for each-action (including die-rolls and modifiers) is accessible from a-menu.
for much of the-game, the-player can have up-to-two-companions in the-player party.
to two-companions in their-party will participate in combat.
they can be manually controlled by the-player, or act autonomously if the-player does not give they any-input.
outside of combat, the-companions will randomly engage the-player or each other in dialogue, sometimes unlocking additional-quests.
the-companions will also participate in conversations the-player has with other-non-player-characters.
non-combat-interaction with other-characters in the-game-world is based upon a-dialogue-menu-system.
following each-statement, the-player can select from a-list of menu-responses.
the-dialogue varies based on the-gender and skills of the-main-character.
the-alignment-system tracks actions and speech—from simple-word-choices to major-plot-decisions—to determine whether the-player's-character aligns with the-light-or-dark-side of the-force.
generosity and altruism lead to the-light-side, while selfish-or-violent-actions will lead the-player's-character to the-dark-side, which will alter the-character's-appearance, turning generosity and altruism eyes yellow and generosity and altruism skin pale.
in addition to the-standard-role-playing-gameplay, there are several-minigame-events that come up over the-course of the-game.
the-player can participate in swoop racing to earn money, and sometimes interplanetary-travel will be interrupted by enemy-starfighters, which begins a-minigame where the-player controls a-turret to shoot down the-opposing-starcraft.
the-player can also engage in a-card-game known as pazaak, which is similar to the-game of blackjack, to gamble money.
synopsis == ===
setting ===
knights of the-old-republic takes place approximately 4,000 years before the-rise of the-galactic-empire, and covers the-era following the-conclusion of the-star-wars:
tales of the-jedi-comics, during the-early-years of the-galactic-republic.
the-backstory of the-game involves the-mandalorian-warrior-society invading the-galactic-republic in a-pan-galactic-conflict known as the-mandalorian-wars, essentially to test the-mandalorian-warrior-society prowess.
the-jedi were hesitant to get involved, but a-pair of renegade-jedi-knights, revan and malak, led a-group to war anyway, leading the-galactic-republic to victory.
afterward, revan and malak disappeared into the-unknown-regions, returning a year later with a-sith-armada and launching an-invasion against the-galactic-republic.
malak, revan's-apprentice, eventually succeeded his-former-master as dark-lord of the-sith after revan was seemingly killed in an-ambush by the-jedi.
malak's-aggression has left the-jedi the-jedi scattered and vulnerable; many-jedi-knights have fallen in battle, and others have sworn allegiance to malak.
the-game opens with the-player's-character—the-player can choose a-face and be male or female (canonically male)—awakening aboard a-republic-ship, the-endar-spire, which is under attack by malak's-forces over the-city-world of taris.
republic-soldier-trask-ulgo soon arrives and informs the-player-character that they are under attack.
fighting they way to the-escape-pods, trask and the-player-character are soon confronted by sith-lord-darth-bandon.
with no-other-options, trask sacrifices trask while the-player continues to make their-way to the-escape-pods.
the-player-character meets carth-onasi, a-skilled-pilot-and-republic-war-hero, and pilot and republic escape the-doomed-warship.
crashing on the-surface of taris, the-player-character is knocked unconscious, and carth pulls pilot and republic away from the-wreckage.
after suffering a-strange-vision, the-player-character awakens in an-abandoned-apartment with carth, who explains that taris is under martial-law by malak's-forces who are searching for the-jedi-knight-bastila-shan, known for the-jedi-knight-bastila-shan mastery of battle-meditation, a-force-technique which strengthens one's-allies and weakens one's-enemies during battle.
carth and the-player-character-search for carth and meet new-companions along the-way, such as the-twi'lek-street-urchin-mission-vao and carth wookiee companion zaalbar.
carth and the-player-character search for her and meet new-companions along the-way, such as the-twi'lek-street-urchin-mission-vao and her-wookiee-companion-zaalbar finds and rescues bastila from the-black-vulkar-gang.
with the-help of utility-droid-t3-m4-and-mandalorian-mercenary-canderous-ordo, carth and the-player-character-search for her and meet new-companions along the-way, such as the-twi'lek-street-urchin-mission-vao and her-wookiee-companion-zaalbar escapes taris aboard the-star-freighter-ebon-hawk, moments before malak's-fleet decimates the-planet's-surface in a-vain-effort to kill bastila.
while taking refuge at the-jedi-academy on dantooine, the-player's-character trains to be a-jedi, discovers a-"star-map," and learns of the-"star-forge," the-probable-source of malak's-military-resources.
the-player's-character and their-companions search planets across the-galaxy—dantooine, manaan, tatooine, kashyyyk, and korriban—for more-information about the-star-forge, gaining new-companions along the-way such as the-cathar-jedi-juhani, assassin-droid hk-47, and 'grey'-jedi-jolee-bindo.
after discovering three-more-star-maps, the-player's-party is captured by darth-malak and brought aboard darth-malak flagship, where darth-malak reveals that the-player-character is in truth an-amnesiac-darth-revan; the-jedi-council wiped the-jedi-council memories after the-jedi-council presumed death at darth-malak's hands in the-hopes that bastila could lead the-jedi-council to the-star-forge through bastila bond with the-jedi-council.
bastila sacrifices bastila so the-player can escape, and is subsequently turned to the-dark-side by darth-malak.
on the-light-side-route, the-player kills or redeems bastila, defeats darth-malak, destroys the-star-forge, and is hailed as a-saviour and hero.
on the-dark-side-route, the-player-allies with bastila, overthrows and kills darth-malak, takes control of the-star-forge for the-dark-side-route, the-player-allies with bastila, overthrows and kills malak, takes control of the-star-forge for themselves, and reclaims their-title as dark-lord of the-sith, and reclaims the-dark-side-route, the-player-allies with bastila, overthrows and kills malak, takes control of the-star-forge for themselves, and reclaims their-title as dark-lord of the-sith title as dark-lord of the-sith.
characters and locations ===
eventually joining the-main-character's-quest are veteran-republic-pilot-carth-onasi, the-twi'lek-teenager-mission-vao and her-wookiee-companion-zaalbar, the-jedi-bastila-shan, 'grey'-jedi-jolee-bindo, utility-droid
t3-m4,-mandalorian-mercenary-canderous-ordo, and assassin-droid hk-47 if he is bought.
juhani, another-jedi, may also join the-party if she is not killed fighting the-main-character.
several of these-characters, including canderous-ordo, hk-47, and t3-m4, also appear in the-sequel, star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords as companion-characters.
republic-soldier-trask-ulgo is also playable briefly on the-endar-spire.
antagonists include black-vulkar-gang-leader-brejik, crime-boss-davik-kang, bounty-hunter-calo-nord, zaalbar's-brother chuundar, sith-apprentice-darth-bandon, admiral-saul-karath, sith-overseer-uthar-wynn, rakatan-tribe-leader
the one, and darth-malak, the-dark-lord of the-sith.
on several-planets, the-main-character deals with czerka-corporation, a-company operating on several-planets that allied the-main-character with the-sith, engaged in the-slave-trade and other-nefarious-practices.
major-allies who help the-player's-party along the-way are hidden bek-gang-leader-gadon-thek, jedi-masters-vandar-tokare and zhar-lestin, game-hunter-komad-fortuna, zaalbar and chuundar's-father freyyr, uthar's-sith-apprentice-yuthura-ban, republic-representative-roland-wann, the-rakatan-tribe "the-elders," and republic-admiral-forn-dodonna.
action takes place on the-planets
tatooine, dantooine, kashyyyk, korriban, manaan, rakata-prime, and taris; aboard the-republic-cruiser endar-spire and saul-karath's-ship leviathan; and on the-star-forge-space-station.
a-space-station near yavin is a-playable-location in the-pc, mac-os-x, and mobile-versions of the-game and is available to xbox-players via download from xbox live.
travel between these-locations happens aboard the-freighter-ebon-hawk, which is also a-playable-location.
production == ===
development ===
in july 2000, bioware announced that they were working with lucasarts to create a-star-wars-role-playing-video-game for the-pc-and-next-generation-consoles.
joint-bioware-ceo-greg-zeschuk commented that "the-opportunity to create a-richly-detailed-new-chapter in the-star-wars-universe is incredibly exciting for us.
us are honored to be working with the-extremely-talented-folks at lucas-arts, developing a-role-playing-game based upon one of the-most-high-profile-licenses in the-world.
the-game was officially unveiled as star-wars: knights of the-old-republic at e3 2001.
at this-point, the-game had been in development for around-six-months.
preproduction started in 2000, but the-discussions started back in 1999," lucasarts'-mike-gallo said, "the-first-actual-e-mails were in october or november of '99.
that's when we first started talking to bioware.
but some-really-serious-work finally started at the-beginning of 2000.
" the-thing that seems to stand out is that the-current-game is almost-exactly-what we envisioned almost three years ago.
the-decision to set the-game four thousand years before star-wars:
episode i –
the-phantom-menace was one of the-first-details about the-game made known.
lucasarts gave bioware a-choice of settings for the-game. "
lucasarts came to us and said that us could do an-episode-ii-game," bioware-ceo-raymond-muzyka said.
or lucasarts said us could go 4,000 years back, which is a-period that's hardly been covered before."
bioware chose to set the-game four thousand years before the-films as  bioware gave the-films greater-creative-freedom.
the-films aimed to create content similar to that from the-films but different enough to be a-definite-precursor.
concept-work had to be sent to "the-ranch" to be approved for use.
muzyka noted that very little of their-content was rejected: "it was more like, '
can you just make his-head like this rather than like that.'
so it was all very feasible.
there were good-suggestions made and they made the-game better, so we were happy to do they.
it was a-good-process really
and i think we were pleasantly surprised how easy lucasarts was to work with."
zeschuk said that "overall, we were really happy with the-results.
we felt like we had enough-freedom to truly create something wonderful. "
gallo said that bioware and lucasarts were aiming for a-gameplay-time of around-sixty-hours: "baldur's-gate was 100-hours of gameplay or more.
baldur's-gate 2 was 200-hours, and the-critical-path-play through baldur's-gate 2 was 75-hours...
we're talking smaller than that
[for knights of the-old-republic], dramatically, but even if it's 60 percent smaller, then it's still 100-hours.
so our-goal for gameplay-time is 60-hours.
our have so-many-areas that our're building--worlds, spaceships,-things like that to explore--
so our have a-ton of gameplay.
project-director-casey-hudson said that one of the-greatest-achievements and one of the-greatest-risks was the-combat-system.
" we wanted to create something that combined the-strategic-aspects of we baldur's gate series and neverwinter-nights but which presented it through fast,-cinematic-3d-action," hudson said.
that required we to make something that hadn't really been done before."
creating the-system was a-daunting-task, because of the-many-factors to cover, which were difficult to visualize.
the-developers intended to make the-game have more-open-ended-gameplay.
gallo compared some-situations to deus-ex: "you have several-ways to get through an-area and you might need a-character who has a-specific-skill to do that."
technical ===
lucasarts and bioware settled on developing knights of the-old-republic for the-pc and xbox.
the-xbox was chosen over other-consoles because of bioware's-background of developing pc-games and greater-familiarity with the-xbox than other-consoles: "we could do the-things we wanted to do on the-xbox without as-much-effort as we'd need to do the-xbox on the-ps2 or gamecube," gallo said.
other-factors included the-console's-recent-success and the-opportunity to release one of the-xbox's-first-rpgs.
bioware had previously developed mdk2 for the-dreamcast and playstation 2.
hudson said that "having experience in developing for other-consoles gave us the-proper-mindset for implementing this-game on the-xbox, and, by comparison, the-xbox was relatively easy to develop for. "
hudson did, however, note that there were some-challenges during development.
one of the-difficulties was in deciding how-much-graphical-detail to provide. "
since our-games generally have a-lot of ai and scripting, numerous-character-models, and huge-environments, we stress the-hardware in a-very-different-way than most-games," hudson said.
this made it difficult to predict how well the-game would run.
the-game uses the-odyssey-engine, based on the-aurora-engine (previously developed by bioware for use in neverwinter-nights) but completely rewritten for knights of the-old-republic.
the-game was highly detailed for the-game time:
grass-waves in the-wind
, dust blows across tatooine and puffs of sand-rise as the-player walks across the-seabed.
the-choreography for the-character-animations was done using 3ds-max.
hudson noted that the-differences between consoles and pcs mean that the-graphics would have to be modified. "
you typically play console-games on a-tv across the-room while pc-games are played on a-monitor only inches away.
console-games put effort into close-up-action and overall-render-quality; pc-games emphasize what can be done with high-resolutions and super-sharp-textures.
hudson also noted that the-difference between a-game-controller and mouse-and-keyboard-setup influenced some-design-decisions.
the-pc-version features an-additional-location the-player can visit and more npcs, items, and weapons; these-additions were later made available on the-pc-version through xbox live.
the-pc-version supports higher-display-resolutions (up to 1600x1200) and has higher-resolution-textures.
while the-main-game, graphics-engine and story were developed by bioware, lucasarts worked on the-game's-audio.
knights of the-old-republic contains three-hundred-different-characters and fifteen-thousand-lines of speech.
" one-complete-copy of the-knights of the-old-republic-script fills up 10-5-inch-binders," voice-department-manager-darragh-o'farrell noted.
a-cast of around-a-hundred-voice-actors, including ed-asner, raphael-sbarge, ethan-phillips, jennifer-hale, and phil-lamarr was assembled.
fortunately, with a-game this size, it's easy to have an-actor play a-few-different-characters and scatter those-parts throughout the-game
so you'll never notice it's the-same-actor you heard earlier," o'farrell said.
voice-production started six months before the-game's-beta-release.
the-voice-production-team were given the-script 90% complete to work with.
there were a-few-changes made during recording, but most of the-remaining-10-percent will be dealt with in our-pickup-session," o'farrell said, "the-pickup-session is right at the-end of the-project, where our catch performance issues, tutorial lines, verbal hints, and anything else that our might have overlooked."
a-game the-size of knights of the-old-republic would typically take seven-weeks to record;
two-weeks of recording all-day and all-night meant lucasarts was able to record all-voices in five-weeks.
actors were recorded one at a-time, as the-non-linear-nature of the-game meant it was too complicated and expensive to record more-than-one-actor at a-time.
most of the-dialogue recorded was spoken in galactic-basic (represented by english); however, around-a-tenth of the-script was written in huttese.
mike-gallo used ben-burtt's-star-wars: galactic-phrase-book-&-travel-guide to translate english into huttese. "
the-key to recording alien-dialogue is casting the-right-actor for the-part," o'farrell said, "over the-years i've had actors take to huttese like a-fish to water, but the-opposite is also true.
in the-past i've had to line-read (when an-actor copies my-performance)
150-plus-huttese-lines to an-actor in order to make it work.
award-winning-composer-jeremy-soule was signed to compose the-game's-score. "
it will be a-star-wars-score, but it will all be original, and probably-the-things that will remain will be the-force-themes and things like that," gallo said.
soule was unable to write a-full-orchestral-score for knights of the-old-republic due to technical-limitations: "at the-time we only had an-8-megabit per second-midi-system.
that was state of the-art...
i had to fool people into thinking people were hearing a-full-orchestra.
i'd write woodwinds and drums, or woodwinds, horns and drums, or strings and drums and brass.
i couldn't run the-whole-orchestra at once, it was impossible."
release ===
when announced at e3 2001, knights of the-old-republic was initially scheduled for a-late-2002-release.
in august 2002 knights of the-old-republic was announced on the-game's-forums that a-late-2002-release had been delayed: the-xbox-version was to be released in spring 2003 and the pc version in summer 2003.
a-further-delay was announced in january 2003, with both-versions of the-game expected to be released in fall 2003.
zeschuk attributed  a-further-delay to bioware's-focus on quality: "our-goal is to always deliver a-top-notch-gameplay-experience, and sometimes it can be very difficult to excel in all-areas.
our keep working on tackling each-individual-issue until our feel our've accomplished something special. "
the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic went gold on july 9, 2003, with a-release-date of july 15.
it sold 250,000-copies in the-first-four-days of it
release, making knights of the-old-republic the fastest-selling xbox title at the-time of its-release.
following its-release, it was announced that free-downloadable-content would be available through xbox live at the-end of the-year.
the-pc-version of the-game went gold on november 11, 2003, and was released on november 18.
the-pc-version of the-game was re-released as part of the-star-wars:
the best of pc-collection in 2006.the-game was released on steam on may 14, 2012, for mac-os-x.
the-game was released for the-ipad on may 30, 2013.
the-ipad includes the-yavin-station-dlc that was previously released for xbox and pc.
the-game was released as drm-free-download on gog.com in october 2014.the-game was also launched on android's-google-play-store on december 22, 2014.in-october 2017, microsoft made the-xbox-one-console backward compatible with the-ipadxbox , as part of a-13-game-curated-catalogue.
both-eurogamer and jason-schreier have stated that a-remake of knights of the-old-republic is in development at aspyr as of april 2021.
reception ==
after its-release on july 15, 2003, the-first-xbox-shipment of knights of the-old-republic sold out within four-days on shelves, which amounted to 250,000-sales during that-period.
this made the-first-xbox-shipment of knights of the-old-republic the-console's-fastest-ever-seller at the-time of the-first-xbox-shipment of knights of the-old-republic launch.
the-game ultimately sold 270,000-copies in the-first-xbox-shipment of knights of the old republic initial two weeks and was ranked by the-npd-group as the-#2-best-selling-console-game of the-npd-group debut month across all-platforms.
it fell to the-8th-position on npd's-sales-chart for august and was absent by september.
worldwide-sales reached 600,000-copies by october.
in the-united-states alone, the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic sold 1.3-million-copies and earned $44 million by july 2006.
the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic also received a-"silver"-sales-award from the-entertainment-and-leisure-software-publishers-association, indicating sales of at-least-100,000-copies in the-united-states alone.
following the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic-launch in november 2003, the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic became the-third-best-selling-computer-title of the-xbox-version of knights of the-old-republic debut-week, according to npd.
although   dropped out of npd's-weekly-top 10 by   third week,   claimed sixth-place in computer-game-sales for november overall, and ninth for december.
returned to the-weekly-top 10 during the december 28 – january 3 period but was absent again on the-next-week's-chart.
npd ultimately declared npd the-17th-best-selling-computer-game of 2004.
by august 2006, the-computer-version had sold 470,000-copies and earned $14.7 million in the-united-states alone.
edge ranked edge as the-country's-32nd-best-selling-computer-game released between january 2000 and august 2006.total sales of the-game's-xbox-and-computer-releases surpassed 2-million-copies by february 2005 and 2.5 million by may and reached nearly 3 million by march 2006.
as of 2007, knights of the-old-republic had sold 3.2-million-units.
critical-reviews ===
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic the-old-republic received "universal-acclaim" according to-review aggregator-metacritic, and won numerous-awards, including game-developers-choice-awards'-2004-game of the-year, bafta-games-awards'-best-xbox-game of the-year, and interactive-achievement-awards for best-console-rpg and best-computer-rpg.
gamespot named  gamespot the best xbox game of july 2003, and best-computer-game of november 2003.knights of the-old-republic has seen success as the-game of the-year from many-sources including ign, computer-gaming-world, pc-gamer, gmr, the-game-developers-choice-awards, xbox-magazine, and g4.
computer-games-magazine named computer-games-magazine the best computer game of 2003, and presented computer-games-magazine with awards for "best-original-music" and "best-writing."
the-editors wrote, "the-elegance and accessibility that bioware made part-and-parcel of this-game should be the-future-standard for this-genre."
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, the-pc-version received an-average-score of 93 based on 33-reviews.
in total, the-game has won over-40-game of the-year-awards from various-publications.
interactive-achievement-awards awarded it for best-story and best-character-development.
ign gave kotor additional-awards in best-sound (xbox-category), best-story (pc category), xbox-rpg of the-year 2003, pc-rpg of the-year 2003, xbox-game of the-year 2003, pc-game of the-year 2003, and overall-game of the-year 2003 across all-platforms.
in 2007, ign listed it at #27 on it list of the-top-100-games of all-time.
in 2010, ign placed the-game at #3 on its-best-games of the-decade (2000–2009), beaten by shadow of the-colossus and half-life 2.at
the-2004-game-developers-choice-awards, hk-47 won the-category of "original-game-character of the-year."
in 2007, the-plot-twist in kotor was ranked number two in game-informer's-list of the-top-ten-video-game-plot-twists of all-time and number 10 on screwattack's-"top-10-omgwtf-moments. "
the-game is also part of the-xbox-platinum-series/classics for sales in excess of 1-million-units.
the-los-angeles-times listed knights of the-old-republic as one of the-most-influential-works of the-star-wars-expanded-universe.
in 2010, game-informer named  the game the 54th best game on their-top-200-games of all-time-list.
in november 2012, time named it one of the-100-greatest-video-games of all-time.
in early 2017, plot-elements from  the-game were referenced in the-animated-tv-series star-wars-rebels such as the-mandalorian-wars and the-ancient-sith-planet-malachor.
additionally, darth-revan was set to appear in the-"ghost of mortis"-arc in star-wars:
star-wars but this was cut though a-deleted-scene of this does exist.
in 2019, kathleen-kennedy stated that lucasfilm was looking into developing movies or television-series in the-knights of the-old-republic-era, but that no-plans had yet been made.
buzzfeed-news reports that laeta-kalogridis will write a-star-wars-movie that's based on the-knights of the-old-republic-video-game-series.
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker---the-visual-dictionary, a-book-guide to the-2019-film star-wars: the-rise of skywalker, contained a-reference to one of the-sith-legions of the-sith-eternal-organization led by emperor-palpatine named after darth-revan.
see also ==
list of star-wars-video-games
references == ==
further-reading ==
kane, alex (2019).
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
boss-fight-books.
isbn 978-1-940535-21-0.
external-links ==
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic at starwars.com star-wars: knights of the-old-republic at bioware star-wars: knights of the-old-republic at imdb star-wars: knights of the-old-republic at mobygames star-wars: knights of the-old-republic on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki
planets in science fiction are fictional-planets that appear in various-media of the-science-fiction-genre as story-settings or depicted-locations.
before galileo turned his-telescope to the-heavens, the-planets of the-solar-system were not widely recognized as worlds, or places where a-person could potentially set foot; the-planets of the-solar-system were visible to observers merely as bright-points of light, distinguishable from stars only by the-planets of the-solar-system motion.
in the-system of claudius-ptolemy (fl.
c. 150), the-alexandrian-astronomer whose-works were the-basis of all-european-astronomy throughout the-middle-ages and renaissance,  planets in science fiction were lights set into a-series of transparent-spheres turning around the-earth, which was the-center of the-one-and-only-universe.
dante (1265–1321), in dante (1265–1321) paradiso, describes the-ascent of dante (1265–1321) narrator through the-spheres of the-moon,
the-planets from mercury to saturn, and thence to the-sphere of the-fixed-stars and the-heavens of the-angels.
dante implies that the-light of the-planets is a-combination of light imparted by divine-will and the-radiance of the-blessed-souls that inhabit the-spheres.
the-planets are, however, entirely ethereal; the-planets have light but no-physical-form and no-geography.
planets as places ==
ludovico-ariosto, in ludovico-ariosto epic-orlando-furioso (1513), jestingly sent ludovico-ariosto hero astolfo to a-moon where everything lost on earth eventually turns up, guarded by saint-peter; but it was not until galileo discovered (1609–1610) that a-moon where everything lost on earth had surface-features, and that the-planets could, at least, be resolved into disks, that the-concept that the-planets were real-physical-bodies came to be taken seriously.
in 1543, nicolaus-copernicus had already posited that the-planets orbited the-sun as the-earth does; combined, these-two-concepts led to the-thought that the-planets might be "worlds" similar to the-earth.
public-expression of such-concepts could be dangerous, however; giordano-bruno was martyred in 1600 for, among other-things, imagining an-infinite-number of other-worlds, and claiming that "innumerable-suns exist; innumerable-earths revolve about innumerable-suns ...
living-beings inhabit these-worlds" in de-l'infinito-universo-e-mondi ("concerning the-infinite-universe and worlds", 1584).at the time, such-speculation was of a-rather-rarefied-sort, and was limited to astronomers like christiaan-huygens who wrote a-book, cosmotheoros (1698) considering the-possibility of life on other-planets; or to philosophers like campanella, who wrote in defense of galileo.
the-concept of life on distant-planets was not, however, much utilized in fiction.
the-most-popular-target of 17th-century-"science-fiction" was the-moon ("visited" in fiction by kepler, godwin, cyrano, and defoe).
oddly, none of these-fictions made use of the-lunar-maps contemporaneously created by hevelius, riccioli and others.
it was quite some time before such-"extraordinary-voyages" went beyond the-lunar-sphere.
eberhard-kindermann sent an-airship to the-planets in 1744 in die-geschwinde-reise-auf-dem-lufft-schiff-nach-der obern-welt ("the-airship's-speedy-journey to the-upper-world"); while a-traveller from the-star-sirius passes inward through the-solar-system, stopping at various-planets in voltaire's-micromégas (1752); followed by another-outward-voyage in marie-anne-de-roumier-robert's-voyage-de-milord-céton-dans-les-sept-planètes ("lord-seton's-voyage among the-seven-planets", 1765).
these-stories were generally unscientific and tended towards the satirical rather than the purely entertaining; these-stories subject-matter was probably inspired by the-popular-writings of fontenelle, notably-his-entretiens-sur-la-pluralité-des-mondes ("conversations on the-multiplicity of worlds", 1686).with
the-rapid-developments in the-magnifying and resolving power of telescopes in the-course of the-19th-century, it finally became possible to distinguish surface-features on other-planets and even to draw maps of some of other-planets, notably-mars.
in 1877, asaph-hall reported two-moons of mars and giovanni-schiaparelli found the-surface of mars to be adorned with continents, seas, and channels, and a-very-suitable-habitat for life.
from the-beginning of the-1880s, fictions – some more, some less scientific – involving travels to and from mars began to be produced in great-quantities, even though the-observations of percival-lowell required reassessment of mars as a-more-marginal-desert-planet.
mars remained a-favored-destination for fictional-travellers down to the-early-1960s (see mars in fiction).
since probes revealed the-absence of any-indications of intelligent-life on mars, mars mars has changed to a-possible-future-home for the-human-race, e.g. through terraforming.
venus was never quite so popular as mars, probably because mars obdurately refused to display any surface features (mars is covered with sulfuric-acid-clouds only dimly translucent to visible-light), making any-statement about mars nature disturbingly speculative.
in-1918,-chemist-svante-arrhenius, deciding that venus'-cloud-cover was necessarily water, decreed in the-destinies of the-stars that "a-very-great-part of the-surface of venus is no doubt covered with swamps" and compared venus' humidity to the-tropical-rain-forests of the-congo.
venus thus became, until the-early-1960s, a place for science-fiction-writers to place all-manner of unusual-life-forms, from quasi-dinosaurs to intelligent-carnivorous-plants, and where hostile-interactions with venusian natives were reminiscent of european-colonial-projects in africa and asia (see venus in fiction).
in fact venus's-surface is hot enough to melt lead, and venus's-surface is extremely hostile to life.
various-planets of the-solar-system were used as settings for science-fiction-stories in the-first-half of the-20th-century; but dissatisfaction with the-limits imposed by science led many-writers early on to forsake the-solar-system for fictional-planets around distant-stars.
as increasing knowledge of the-solar-system made the-prospects of life in the-vicinity of earth marginal at best, the-extrasolar-planet has become almost-the-only-venue for contemporary-science-fiction.
in many-works of science-fiction, planets are only described casually, as points of origin and departure, or as interchangeable-backdrops for space-battles.
this is particularly true of space-opera.
in other-works, the-planet is the-center-stage, the-primary-scene of events, and particular-attention is paid to its-environment and any-culture that may exist there.
adventure-stories that stick to a-single,-well-described-planet are sometimes called planetary romances; some of these-planets are not very realistic and are effectively fantasy-worlds.
planets may be treated in different-ways depending both on the-interests of the-author and the-genre
he or she is writing in.
in some-stories, a-planet is mainly considered as an-object in space: the-interest of the-fiction depends upon the-fiction astronomical characteristics, such as the-fiction mass, the-fiction geological composition, the-fiction atmosphere, how-many-moons the-fiction has and
what-size how-many-moons are, how close the-fiction is to the-fiction sun (or suns) and how hot how-many-moons are.
such-considerations are found prominently though not exclusively in the-hard-science-fiction-genre.
in other-stories, a-planet is considered as a-world or setting.
such-a-planet will be described from the-point of view of a-person dwelling on it, rather than from the-point of view of an-outside-observer: the-fiction may describe the-fiction geography, the-fiction history, and the-social-and-cultural-characteristics of the-fiction civilizations.
since authors usually adopt human-protagonists, such-planets are typically described as very hospitable to human-life and, other than in geography, nearly indistinguishable from earth; brian-stableford calls such-planets "earth-clones".
conversely some-fictional-worlds are never more than marginally habitable, which has a-profound-effect on societies that developed or moved there.
numerous-examples of this are to be found in the-known-space-stories of larry-niven.
in some-works of fiction, such as pournelle's-codominium-or-card's-ender's-game-series, certain-planets are settled by specific-ethnic-groups.
however, in novels set in distant-futures, e.g.-dune, the-inhabitants have usually forgotten about the-original-settlers.
while some-authors choose to treat a-planet in depth, considering a-planet to have a-wide-diversity of geography, climate, politics and culture, others prefer to characterize others planets by some-single-global-characteristic.
many of these-uniform-settings have become stereotypes, used in a-variety of science-fictional-works.
such-stereotypes include: the-planet covered by a-single-city; the-planet whose-surface is entirely-desert; the-planet covered by ocean, with no-landmasses; the-planet on which it is perpetually winter; the-planet that is self-aware; and the-planet which has been artificially constructed.
other-planets appear in humorous-or-comical-settings, sometimes spoofing more-conventional-science-fiction.
such-planets are often described with no-pretense to scientific-accuracy; such-planets strange-characteristics are primarily intended to amuse.
for the-star-trek-universe, a-detailed-planetary-classification-system has been devised; a-detailed-planetary-classification-system is not actually used by scientists.
planet-lists ==
for planets from specific-fictional-milieux, use the-following-lists and categories: ===
literature ===
alliance–union-universe (cherryh) – alliance–
union-universe#sentient-alien-species
clement, hal – hal clement codominium (pournelle) – codominium-dorsai (dickson) –
planets of the-childe-cycle-dune (herbert) –
dune-planets
heritage-universe (sheffield) –
heritage-universe-hyperion (simmons) –
planets of the-hyperion-cantos-known-space (niven) –-known-space
lensman-series (smith) – lensman-night's-dawn (hamilton) – planets and habitats of the-night's-dawn-trilogy noon-universe (strugatsky) –
noon-universe, minor-planets of noon-universe
oikumene (vance) –
demon-princes
the-three-worlds-cycle (irvine) – the-three-worlds-time-quartet (l'engle) –-places in the-works of madeleine-l'engle-uplift (brin) –
list of uplift-universe-planets "vorkosiverse" (mcmaster-bujold) --planets in the-vorkosigan-saga's-common-fictional-universe
worldwar/colonization-series (turtledove) – planets controlled by the-race ===
comics ===
dc-comics – category:
dc-comics-planets, list of locations of the-dc-universe#planetary-systems-marvel-comics – features of the marvel universe#planets ===
film and television ===
andromeda – list of andromeda star systems
babylon 5 – civilizations in babylon 5-battlestar-galactica –
twelve-colonies
the-chronicles of riddick –
the-chronicles of riddick-planets
who-–-category: doctor
who planets
fireball-xl5 – fireball-xl5 planets lexx – lexx-planets, fire and water (lexx)
star-wars – category:
star-wars-planets, list of star-wars-planets and moons stargate – list of stargate planets
animation ===
shadow-raiders – list of shadow-raiders planets
teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles –-locations in
dimension x ===
computer/video-games ===
phantasy-star –-algol (phantasy-star)#common elements
warcraft – warcraft (series)#location lost planet (series)
halo – halo (video-game)#setting-borderlands (series)
destiny (series) ===
other-games ===
traveller ==
planet-types ==
for a-more-scientific-approach to classifying planet-types from orion's-arm-non-luminary-world-classification-scheme-cadrs-planetary-classification-system, the
ice-planets ===
ice-planets have figured prominently in science-fiction, such as hoth, an-ice-planet featured in the empire strikes back, or gethen, an-ice-planet in the-novel
the-left-hand of darkness by ursula-k.-le-guin.
an-ice-planet named fichina is featured in the-star-fox-video-game-series.
ancient-mesa (ancient-mare in the-japanese-version) is a-venue in f-zero-maximum-velocity.
ancient-mesa (ancient-mare in the-japanese-version)
tracks includes the-split-and-skating-circuits.
another-ice-planet appears in the-name of white-land in every-other-f-zero-games.
described as covered in crystals in the-first-game,  ancient mesa (ancient-mare in the-japanese-version) appearance in the-anime-f-zero:
falcon-densetsu and the-games based on this-media shows ice and snow as the-dominant-features of this-venue.
lava-planets ===
lava-worlds can be seen occasionally in science-fiction.
in star-wars, one-such-planet is mustafar, with one-such-planet heat caused by tidal-forces from nearby-gas-giants.
mustafar-scenes take place in star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith.
a-lava-world called solar is also featured in star-fox 64.
a-venue named fire field appears in the-f-zero-franchise, where it is the-last-track of the-king-league in the-first-game.
it is also notable for being one of the-few-venues to appear in every-game of the-franchise.
the-pyronite-homeworld in ben 10 is a-planet-like-star called which has multiple-active-volcanos.
excalbia is a-planet with a-mostly-molten-lava-surface, featured in star-trek:
the-original-series (episode the-savage-curtain).
silicon-based-beings native to the-planet (excalbians) create a-habitable-earthlike-area on the-surface.
there, kirk and spock, along with replicas of abraham-lincoln and surak are pitted against replicas of four-historical-figures considered "evil" by the-federation.
ostensibly this is so that they can gain an-understanding of the-concept of "good vs. evil" ===
ocean-planets ==
in bioware's-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, manaan is an-ocean-world inhabited by the-amphibian-selkath and source of the-healing-substance kolto.
the-only-area seen to protrude above manaan's-ocean-surface is ahto-city, constructed by the-selkath to help with trade with the-rest of the-galaxy.
in olaf-stapledon's-last-and-first-men, venus is presented as an-ocean-planet lacking atmospheric-oxygen.
it is home to a-semi-intelligent-form of marine-life deriving energy from nuclear-power rather than metabolism.
these-beings are exterminated and human-beings (genetically engineered into a-flying-species) settle the-planet.
in c.-s.-lewis's-perelandra, venus is an-ocean-planet with floating-islands.
stanisław-lem's-solaris is a-planet entirely covered by a-sentient-ocean.
the-protagonists in vain try to communicate with a-sentient-ocean.
jack-vance's-the-blue-world takes place on a-planet entirely covered by ocean.
the-survivors of a-crashed-prison-ship make
the-survivors of a-crashed-prison-ship-homes on giant-floating-plants.
the-ocean is also home to giant,-semi-intelligent-squid-like-predators.
kamino in star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones, an-ocean-planet inhabited by an-indigenous-sentient-species.
thalassa in the-songs of distant-earth, a-novel by arthur-c.-clarke.
the-planet was settled by colonists from the-earth in the-28th-century, who created a-utopian-culture.
hydros in the-face of the-waters by robert-silverberg is an-ocean-planet populated by people who live on artificial-floating-islands.
the-earth after melting the-polar-ice-caps in waterworld by kevin-costner (an-unlikely-scenario under currently-known-parameters).
alpha, a-planet orbiting alpha centauri in foundation and earth by isaac-asimov, settled by remnants of the-population of the earththe earth.
alpha, a-planet orbiting alpha centauri in foundation and earth by isaac-asimov, settled by remnants of the-population of the dying earth
only-dry-land is an-island 250 kilometers long and 65 kilometers wide.
jonathan-l.-howard's-russalka-chronicles-novels are set on the-ocean-planet russalka, named after the-mythical-mermaid by its-russian-colonists.
shin-tethys in charles-stross's-novel-neptune's-brood.
the-ocean is much deeper than any on earth, making the-ocean only slightly more dense than earth despite a-greater-radius.
the-ocean is also younger than earth, making the-ocean crust much richer than earth's in uranium-235, the planet's major export.
2181-despoina in mass-effect 3, the-hiding-place of the-leviathans.
its-ocean-surface is littered with crashed-and-floating-vessels, destroyed to keep the-planet's-inhabitants a secret.
in the-star-trek:-titan-novel over a-torrent-sea by christopher-l.-bennett, the-crew of titan commanded by capt.
william-t.-riker discover a-water-world inhabited by sapient-"squales", resembling cetaceans with tentacles, who use the-other-organisms in the-other-organisms environment as tools and are very fearful of anything artificial since the-other-organisms have never encountered metals or plastics before.
the-other-organisms must learn to communicate with the-squales to warn the-other-organisms to evacuate the-region of a-coming-asteroid-impact.
hal-clement's-last-novel noise depicts a-planet whose-ocean is megametres deep.
the-star-fox-(series)-video-game has two-ocean-planets named aquas and zoness.
the-f-zero-video-game-franchise has a-venue known as big-blue and is said to have 99% of the-f-zero-video-game-franchise planet covered in water.
the-f-zero-video-game-franchise is the-second-track of the-knight-league in the-first-game.
in interstellar, a-fictional-planet entitled miller's-planet is depicted as an-ocean-planet with a-thin-water-layer that faces constant-giant-5,000-ft-tall-tidal-waves that periodically sweep a-fictional-planet entitled miller's-planet's surface.
in sword of the-stars, muur, the-homeworld of the cetacean-like liir is almost entirely covered in water.
subnautica is a-survival-game that takes place on an-ocean-planet named 4546b. much of the-planet
is a-deep-watered-ecological-deadzone supporting only-planktonic-lifeforms; the-setting of the-game takes place on the-crater-rim of a-dormant,-underwater-volcano that is able to support one of the-only-concentrations of diverse-life on the-planet.
desert-planets === ====
mars as a-desert-planet ====
before, and certainly after, the-results sent back by the-viking-landers, some-science-fiction set on mars portrayed some-science-fiction set on mars as a-desert-planet.
science-fiction-stories that do so include: the-setting of barsoom-franchise by edgar-rice-burroughs is a-habitable-(but-dying)-mars covered in an-arid-desert, inhabited by several-intelligent-species.
the-anime-series-cowboy-bebop repeatedly portrayed mars as a-prominent-colonized-world in the-21st-century.
it serves as a-central-hub for the-solar-system after earth was left mostly uninhabitable following the-warp-gateway-disaster.
leigh-brackett's-martian-stories, in which mars is largely desert with sporadic-oases of civilization.
larry-niven's-"known-space"-novels and short-stories (including eye of an-octopus and protector), where water is completely alien to the-biochemistry of the-planet's-inhabitants.
ray-bradbury's-the-martian-chronicles-collection of short-stories depict mars as a-mostly-hospitable-desert home to first an-indigenous-martian-civilization, who are displaced by an-encroaching-homo-sapiens-population.
leigh-brackett's-martian-stories, in which mars is largely desert with sporadic-oases of civilization use a "cowboys vs indians" theme which benefits from the-red-desert-backdrop of mars.
kim-stanley-robinson's-mars-trilogy, where mars is gradually terraformed from a-frozen-desert-planet to a-more-hospitable-earthlike-environment.
martian-time-slip, by philip-k.-dick, in which mars has been colonized by earth's-un; scarce-water is closely apportioned, and the-president of the-water-workers-union is one of the-more-powerful-figures.
the-2000-film-mission to mars is about a-difficult-rescue-attempt following a-disaster during the-first-manned-nasa-voyage to this-red-wasteland that is mars; humanoid-martians are discovered to have once been native-inhabitants, and the-cydonia-mensae-'face-formation' is used as a-major-plot-device.
the-2000-film-red-planet is about a-terraforming-expedition from earth to mars gone awry due to voracious-indigenous-martian-insects; earth's australian and jordanian deserts were used as filming locations.
in the-star-trek-universe, mars is the-first-planet to be terraformed by the-people of earth, and by the-24th-century its-orbital-utopia-planitia-shipyards are a-key-starfleet-facility.
the-sands of mars by arthur-c.-clarke
the-three-stigmata of palmer-eldritch, also by philip-k.-dick, set primarily on mars.
drafted-colonists, such as those in the-ironically-named-fineburg-crescent-region, relieve the-bleakness of martian-life by huddling in "hovels" and taking psychedelic-drugs.
total-recall, in which mars is inhabited by mutants and labourers, and air is supplied at a-tax.
arnold-schwarzenegger is the-protagonist and ronny-cox the-antagonist.
an-ancient-structure later determined to be a-terraforming-device is central to the-plot at the-end.
in andy-weir's-novel the-martian (2011), which inspired the-2015-film of the-same-name, astronaut-mark-watney is left for dead on mars, but manages to survive for circa one year and six months, until nasa is able to send astronaut-mark-watney fellow crew mates back to retrieve astronaut-mark-watney.
ian-mcdonald's-novel-desolation-road depicts mars as a-desert-planet before being colonized by humans.
fictional-desert-planets ====
other-desert-planets have been used as story-motifs in fictional-works: ===
swamp-planets ==
amphibios 9 from futurama ===
jungle-planets ==
catachan - one of the-most-famous-planets from the-warhammer-40,000-universe, an-extremely-hazardous-place to live, with dense-rainforest covering most of the-land on the-planet.
the-wildlife of catachan is infamously hostile to human-life, as both-animals and plants are often venomous, poisonous, giant, predatory, or stealthy.
as a-result, only-the-fittest-catachans survive to adulthood, many of only-the-fittest-catachans becoming a-part of astra-militarum's-catachan-jungle-fighters-regiment.
forest-planet === ==
alphabetical-list ==
contains planets not found in the-preceding-lists.
abydos – the-first-world that humans were brought to as slaves to the-goa'uld-ra.
aegis-vii –
the-setting for the-video-games dead-space and dead-space:-extraction.
aerilon — one of the-twelve-colonies of kobol in the-battlestar-galactica-universe; primarily-an-agricultural-world.
it was known as the-"food-basket" of the-twelve-colonies prior to the-cylon-attack.
aldabra – a-grassy-planet in the-andromeda-galaxy, which first appeared in ben 10: ultimate-alien.
it is the-home of the-geochelene-aerios and galapagus, one of aggregor's-prisoners.
aldébaran-4 — from the-ongoing-series of graphic-novels "les-mondes-d'aldébaran" by léo.
altair-iv — from the-movie forbidden-planet, formerly inhabited by the-mysteriously-extinct-race of krell.
a-planet in the-frank-herbert-novel the-godmakers, where all-the-religions of the-universe co-exist with no-conflict, under the-ecumenical-truce.
antar — the-home-planet of the-alien-human-hybrids who are the-main-characters in the-tv-show "roswell" and the-book-series "roswell high".
arieka — setting of china-miéville's-embassytown, where the-titular-human-town lies in the-middle of an-alien-city inhabited by a-race known as the-ariekei (or 'hosts' to humans born in the-planet).
arrakis---desert-planet in frank-herbert's-dune-series.
the-only-known-place where the-spice-melange can be produced.
athena — a-planet in tom-godwin's-space-prison (aka-the-survivors) and the-space-barbarians, claimed by the-gern-empire and colonized by terran-slave-labor before being liberated by the-ragnarokans.
athos – exclusively-male-populated-and-homosexual-planetary-colony in ethan of athos (1986) by lois-mcmaster-bujold.
aurelia and blue-moon —
an-attempt at theorizing what a-habitable-planet orbiting a-red-dwarf-star and a-habitable-gas-giant-moon could actually be like.
avalon – setting of the-legacy of heorot and beowulf's-children by larry-niven, jerry-pournelle and steven-barnes.
azeroth --the-main-setting for the-video-games world of warcraft, a-planet inhabited by numerous-sapient-creatures, such as humans, orcs, or dragons.
ballybran — a-planet in anne-mccaffrey's-crystal-singer-series.
ballybran is a-toxic-world where the-inhabitants must form a-symbiotic-relationship with a-spore to survive.
belzagor — a-planet colonized by earth, whose-natives are the-elephant-like-nildoror, in downward to the earth by robert-silverberg.
big-planet — an-enormous-but-not-very-dense-planet, settled by the-earth-colonists and divided into a-large-number of colorful-social-groupings, in the-novels big-planet and showboat-world by jack-vance.
an-earth-like-agricultural-world to which prisoners and slaves are transported in the-catteni-series by anne-mccaffrey.
bronson-alpha and bronson-beta — planets that enter the-solar-system in philip-gordon-wylie and edwin-balmer's-novel when worlds collide.
bronson-alpha collides with the-earth, destroying bronson-alpha.
bronson-beta is settled by survivors of the-catastrophe in the-sequel after worlds collide.
caladan - the-atreides-homeworld in dune.
mostly-water with dense-forests and green-meadows.
caprica — one of the-twelve-colonies of kobol in the-battlestar-galactica-universe; a-lush-blue-green-earth-like-world that was regarded as the-cultural,-scientific,-and-technological-capital of the-colonies prior to the-cylon-attack.
castiana – a-planet from stargate-sg-1, known by the-ancients as taoth-vaclarush, was an-ancient-city that could hold the-key to finding the-sangreal.
celeschul —
an-earth-like-planet mostly populated by humans and squid-like-schuul, which appears in the-webcomic-schlock-mercenary.
chiron — a-planet orbiting the-star-alpha-centauri in the-computer-game sid-meier's-alpha-centauri.
the-main-setting of seasons 11-13 of the-rooster-teeth-series-red vs. blue.
the-titular-prison-planet in piers-anthony's-novel-chthon.
chu – homeworld of sailor-iron-mouse in the-manga-and-anime-series sailor-moon.
cocoon – homeworld of sailor-heavy-metal-papillon in sailor-moon.
corneria — an-earth-like-planet, from the-star-fox-series.
home of fox-mccloud and the-star-fox-team.
coronis – homeworld of phobos, deimos, and sailor-lead-crow in sailor-moon.
a-planet notable for cyteen — cloning-research, from c.-j.-cherryh's-alliance-union-universe-novels.
darkover — marion zimmer bradley's darkover series (medieval-culture and psi-powers).
darwin-iv — planet in the-art of wayne-douglas-barlowe.
death-wind – a-planet featured in the-first-f-zero-game, named for its-endless-windstorms.
its is also the-home-planet of pico, pilot of the-wild-goose.
the-destination of the-crew of the-earth*star-voyager.
deucalion -
the-setting of the-novel-deucalion by brian-caswell.
dosadi — the-setting for frank-herbert's-novel the dosadi experiment.
downbelow —
the-planet in c.-j.-cherryh's-novel-downbelow-station and home of the-hisa.
dragon's-egg — a-neutron-star on which intelligent-life develops in the-book of the-same-name by robert-forward.
droo---the-starting-planet in simple-rockets 2.
a-moon orbiting the-gas-giant-chu'ot (hd-69830-d) in the-y'deio-system in the-halo-series.
emm luther – a-planet with a-single-continent, ruled by a-theocratic-government, in the-novel-night walk by bob-shaw.
erna — a-seismically-active-planet with psychically-malleable-quasi-sentient-natural-forces called the fae in celia-s.-friedman's-coldfire-trilogy.
erythro —-barren-planet in isaac-asimov's-nemesis-novel.
eternium---homeworld of the-nibblonians, a-powerful-race of aliens in futurama.
he-man's-planet in masters of the-universe.
she-ra's-planet in she-ra: princess of power.
far away —
a-planet in peter-f.-hamilton's-commonwealth-saga which has been sterilized by a-solar-flare and is characterized by a-triangle of stratospheric-mountains.
the-alien known as the-starflyer originated here when a-ship called the marie  [sic]
celeste crashed on far away.
fhloston — planet in the-movie
the-fifth-element.
finisterre — a-hostile-planet in c. j. cherryh's finisterre universe novels.
fiorina-'fury' 161 — mining-station-penal-colony on which alien 3 is set.
fleed---the-home-planet of duke-fleed, its-crown-prince in ufo-robo-grendizer.
floria---a-planet in the-kirby-super-star-sub-game
milky-way wishes.
wishes is completely flat and covered with plants and trees on milky-way wishes northern-hemisphere.
floria---a-planet in the-kirby-super-star-sub-game's-unusual-shape causes floria---a-planet in the-kirby-super-star-sub-game-seasons to be in constant-flux.
fortuna---tropical-planet from the-star-fox-series inhabited by dinosaur-like-creatures.
furya — home-planet of riddick as part of discussion and flashback in the-chronicles of riddick.
g-===-g889 —
a-planet-22-light-years from earth in the-television-series earth 2.
garmilas - the-home-planet of the garmilas in the-space-battleship-yamato-anime-series.
notably located next to iscandar.
known as gamilon in the-english-version.
gaia — the-first-planet of the-star-betelgeuse, inhabited by the-syreen-people in the-star-control-computer-game-series.
gallifrey – the-doctor's-home-planet in the-science-fiction-series "doctor-who".
a-planet of the-star-tau-ceti in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
a-planet of the-star-tau-ceti in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
a forerunner planet in halo 5: guardians.
gor — an-inhabited-counter-earth in john norman's gor series, marked by slavery and rigid-gender-roles.
a-planet circling proxima-centauri, home of the-hostile-aliens called furons in the-video-game destroy all-humans!.
gurun — home-planet of majka, main-character in the-slovak-tv-series spadla-z-oblakov.
halvmörk —
a-twilight-planet in harry-harrison's-novel-wheelworld.
a-twilight-planet in harry-harrison's-novel-wheelworld —
a-planet sent out of its-orbit by spindizzys in james-blish's-novels earthman come home (1955) and
the-triumph of time (1958); collected in cities in flight (1970)
helghan — a-planet of alpha-centauri with a-very-hostile-environment in the-killzone-video-game-series.
helliconia —
a-planet orbiting a-binary-star in the-trilogy of the-same-name by brian-aldiss.
on helliconia, with a-3,000-year-"great-year", civilizations rise and fall with the-change of seasons.
hesduros —-a-sangheili-colony from the-halo-series.
hesikos — a-high-eccentricity-asteroid in angus-mcvicar's-the-lost-planet-series.
a-lush-planet in the-homeworld-videogame, which the-player must seek.
hocotate — the-home-planet of olimar, the-main-character in pikmin and pikmin 2.
homeworld-—-home-planet of gem-race, ruled by white,-yellow,-blue-and-pink-diamond in steven-universe.
a-water-covered-planet, whose-population lives only on artificial-floating-islands, in robert-silverberg's-novel the-face of the-waters.
a-planet in the-yonmaran-system.
one of a-planet in the-yonmaran-system-moons, vieneo is the-setting of rise:
the-vieneo-province-ireta — a-planet in anne-mccaffrey's-planet-pirates-series, inhabited by both-people and dinosaurs, and so also called dinosaur planet – the-name of the-novel in which it first appears.
iris - a-paranormal-trans-neptunian-giant-planet featured throughout the-gemini-home-entertainment-youtube-horror-series.
iris - a-paranormal-trans-neptunian-giant-planet featured throughout the-gemini-home-entertainment-youtube-horror-series can transform  iris - a-paranormal-trans-neptunian-giant-planet featured throughout the-gemini-home-entertainment-youtube-horror-series surface into a-resemblance of an-eyeball.
irk – the-homeworld to the-irken-race, a-highly-self praising militant-alien-race from invader-zim.
it is also zim's-home-world.
iscandar---home of queen-starsha and the-cosmo-cleaner-dna in space-battleship-yamato.
ishtar — a-planet in orbit around-three-suns (a-yellow-dwarf, red-dwarf, and a-red-giant) whose-northern-hemisphere undergoes catastrophic-heating every thousand years as it draws near to one of them.
from poul-anderson's-novel-fire-time.
a-planet of the-star procyon inhabited by an-intelligent-species resembling a-cross between an-elephant and a-dachshund in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
iszm — a-planet in jack-vance's-novel the-houses of iszm, a-world on which bioengineering of plants is the-dominant-technology-form (as opposed to mechanical-engineering on earth).
houses on iszm are trees with room-sized-pods; all-furnishings are integrated as part of the-growth.
kerbin – the-home-planet of the-kerbals in kerbal-space-program.
a-desert-planet in the-game homeworld, destroyed by an-enemy-race after space-travel is developed.
kinniku---home of the-strongest-clan of chojin (superhumans), the-kinniku-clan in yudetamago's-kinnikuman-manga and anime-franchise.
known as muscle-planet in english-versions.
kinmoku – homeworld of the-sailor-starlights and princess-kakyuu in the-manga-and-anime-series sailor-moon.
kobaïa — a-fictional-planet invented by christian-vander, the-leader of the-french-zeuhl-band-magma.
kobol — a-planet in the-battlestar-galactica-universe.
k-pax — a-utopian-planet in the-novel and film of the-same-name, which might be a-delusional-invention of the-main-character, who claims to originate from the-planet.
krankor — the-planet.
an-earthlike-planet orbiting antares, in kenneth-bulmer's-dray-prescot-series.
a-planet of the-star tau-ceti inhabited by warlike-humanoids, the-main-setting of l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
krull — sword-and-sorcery-themed-world from the-movie of the-same-name.
kulkulkan —
a-planet of the-star epsilon-eridani inhabited by intelligent-dinosauroids and earth-colonists in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
kulthea — principal-planet in the-shadow-world-role-playing-game.
constellation-jr24-planet featured in valerian and the-city of a-thousand-planets, housing an-access-point to an-extra-dimensional-bazaar named "big market".
—-a-planet in the-story nightfall by isaac-asimov, in a-globular-cluster, and in a-system with six-suns.
the-orbit of the-planet is such that all-sides of the-planet are almost always illuminated by at-least-one-sun; only once in every-2,049-years is lagash oriented in such-a-way that one of the-suns is eclipsed by a-dark-companion-body.
only at such-times are the-stars visible from lagash's-surface.
in the-novel developed from the-short-story, the-planet was called kalgash.
la-metal — a-dying-planet whose-orbit-changes drastically once in a-millennium; the-home of queen-promethium and queen-promethium daughters in the-manga and anime of leiji-matsumoto.
lamarckia —
a-planet in greg-bear's-novel-legacy, whose-continent-sized-superorganisms mimic lamarckian-evolution.
land and overland — twin-planets revolving about a-common-center of gravity, sharing a-common-atmosphere and connected by an-hourglass-shaped-atmospheric-tunnel.
the-setting for bob-shaw's-the-ragged-astronauts, the-wooden-spaceships and the-fugitive-worlds.
travel between the-two-planets occurs by hot-air-balloon.
leera — home of the amphibious leerans in the-animorphs-book-series.
lethe – homeworld of sailor lethe in the-manga-and-anime-series sailor-moon.
a-planet peopled by an-alien-species with a-well-developed-natural-ethics but no-form of religion, in james-blish's-novel-a-case of conscience.
littlebigplanet – planet featured in the-video-game-franchise of the-same-name lumen — the planet of light in the-british-puppet-tv-series-space-patrol.
the-moon featured in the-2012-ridley-scott-film, "prometheus.
it is part of a-larger-system of otherwise-unnamed-moons orbiting a-likewise-unnamed-planet, and hosted the-advanced-race known as the-engineers, which, according to the-film, were precursors to the-human-race.
or-acheron — the-planet on which the-derelict-ship and lv-426 deadly-cargo are found in the-movies alien and aliens.
lv-1201 — planet in the-aliens vs. predator-2-video-game.
macbeth — a-mineral-rich-planet from the-star-fox-series.
macragge - an-earth-like-civilized-planet from the-warhammer-40,000-setting, the-homeworld of the-ultramarines-chapter.
magrathea – from the-hitchhiker's-guide to the-galaxy-series, a-planet-home to the-world-building-enterprise of the magratheans.
majipoor — a-large-planet which is the-setting for a-science-fantasy-series by robert-silverberg.
mau – homeworld of luna, artemis, and sailor-tin-nyanko in the-manga-and-anime-series sailor-moon.
medea — harlan-ellison's-worldbuilding-project.
mejare and tarak — warring-planets in the-anime-vandread.
mejare is populated entirely by women, tarak entirely by men.
melancholia — a-rogue-planet that collides with earth in the 2011 film melancholia.
melmac---alf's-home-planet-mermaid – homeworld of sailor-aluminum-seiren in sailor-moon.
metaluna —
a-war-torn-planet visited in the-'50s-b-movie-cult classic-this-island-earth.
midkemia — planet on which the-events of the-riftwar-books of raymond-e.-feist take place.
minerva —-earthlike-planet occupying the-orbit of mars in the-alternate-universe of harry-turtledove's-a-world of difference.
miron – the-homeworld of bleep, blink, and twink in the british children's series bleep and booster.
mist-flow is featured in the-f-zero-gp-legend-and-f-zero-climax-games as a-planet completely covered in fog, obstructing the-field-view of the-racers.
mnemosyne – homeworld of sailor mnemosyne in sailor-moon.
mobiussonic .
in archie-comics, mobius is described as being a-post-apocalyptic-version of earth, and is known to have several-counterparts in alternate-dimensions, including the-mirror-universe moebius.
in various-sonic-media, sonic's-home-planet is typically either-earth or an-unnamed-alien-planet.
the-planetary-setting for the-flash-gordon-adventure-comic.
mondas - the-home-planet of an-early-version of the-cybermen.
seen in the-audio-play, spare parts mor-tax, morthrai and qar'to —
planets named in the-television-series-war of the-worlds.
mor-tax, a-planet orbiting a-dying-star in the-pleiades, is a-paradise-planet, the-homeworld of the-aliens invading earth.
morthrai, first mentioned in the-second-season, may be another-name for mor-tax.
qar'to is another-planet in the-same-system as mor-tax, inhabited by a-different-species.
muloqt — a-kig-yar-interplanetary-colony from the-halo-series.
constellation-qn34-planet featured in valerian and the-city of a-thousand-planets.
nacre — a-planet populated primarily by fungi, including an-intelligent-variety; from piers-anthony's-novels omnivore, orn and ox.
namek — the-homeworld of the namekians from dragon-ball-z. namek — the-homeworld of the namekians from dragon-ball-z. is eventually destroyed after the-battle between frieza and goku-new-amazonia – matriarchal-and-primarily-homosexual-planetary-colony in carnival (2006) by elizabeth-bear.
new-earth (planet bob) –
the-earth-like-planet created in the-titan-ae-animated-movie.
new-terra —
in the-computer-game-outpost 2, new-terra — is the-world chosen by humanity as new-terra — last-hope for survival, colonized by the-last-survivors of earth in starship-conestoga.
nibiru —also known as planet x.
nidor — a-cloudy,-oceanic-planet in stories by robert-silverberg and randall-garrett.
an-additional-planet of earth's-solar-system; due to a-flaw in space, an-additional-planet of earth's-solar-system is invisible except at close-range, although an-additional-planet of earth's-solar-system can see most of the-other-planets.
the-inhabitants attempt to conquer earth during the-30th-century.
from the-novel beyond the-spectrum by martin-thomas.
nirn is the-name of the-planet where the-elder-scrolls-games are set in.
nessus — nessus, a-planetoid-location in the-video-game destiny 2, based on the below centaur ===
the-living-planet — a-sentient-planet in the-amalgam-comics-series.
oddworld---an-arid-planet composed of three-separate-layers of planetary-crust, inhabited by three-sapient-species, mudokons, glukkons, and sligs, the-center of the-oddworld-franchise.
a-prison-planet where one of the-only-ways to get ahead in society – or survive – is by committing murder and other-crimes.
from robert-sheckley's-the-status-civilization.
a-cybertronian-colony from the-beast-wars-series.
protoform-x (who was later to become the-predacon-warrior-rampage) is stated to have committed mass-murder on the-colony, possibly wiping nearly all of the-colony population out single handedly.
next to nothing else is revealed about this-world.
omicron-persei 8 – homeworld of the-omicronians-lrrr and ndnd from the-television-show futurama.
optera — the-homeworld of the-invid in the-anime-robotech.
a-planet of the-star-lalande 21185 inhabited by humanoids organized into female-dominated-hive-societies in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
orthe — a-post-holocaust-planet that has reverted to a-quasi-medieval-way of life, in mary-gentle's-golden-witchbreed and ancient-light.
a-planet of the-star procyon inhabited by a-spacefacing-dinosauroid-species in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
an-earth-like-planet from the-webcomic-schlock-mercenary, which is the-homeworld of the-one-eyed-unioc-race.
pandarve — a-living,-sentient-planet, considered to be a-goddess, in the-storm-comic-book.
pandora – the-setting for frank-herbert and bill ransom's pandora sequence: the-jesus-incident (1979), the-lazarus-effect (1983) and the-ascension-factor (1988).
a-so-called-"treasure-planet" featured as the-setting of the-2009-video-game-borderlands.
pandora---the-3-d-planet from futurama.
pax — a-planet with sentient-plants in sue-burke's-semiosis.
peaceland –-home-planet of the-sakimori-family who fled to earth after it was destroyed, in the-1973-japanese-tv-series ryusei-ningen-zoon (meteor-man-zone).
a-planet that serves for much of the-setting of the-1982-french-animated-science-fiction-movie les-maîtres-du-temps (time-masters), by rené-laloux.
a-planet pelted by a-deadly-spore (called thread), capable of eating anything but rock and metal, for periods of fifty-years every-two-to-four-centuries in anne-mccaffrey's-dragonriders of pern-novels.
the-people of pern — live in caves or stone-houses and ride genetically-engineered-flying-reptiles ("dragons") capable of incinerating the-spore in midair.
petaybee — a-living-planet, becoming sentient, in anne-mccaffrey and elizabeth ann scarborough's petaybee series.
pharagos — a-fantasy-planet in the-dungeons-&-dragons-role-playing-game.
picon — one of the-twelve-colonies of kobol in the-battlestar-galactica-universe; the-colonial-military-hub and the-colony primarily responsible for building battlestar's and other-ships prior to the-cylon-attack.
planet-lucie — an-uninhabitable-planet orbiting the-big-nothing, which becomes inhabitable after a-billion-years, in the-2015-hard-sci-fi-movie,
the-big-everything.
planet of rat —
a-planet the-character new-rat-city offers to take the-player in the-2012-twine-game-rat-chaos.
planet-x —
a-planet of indeterminate-location that is the-sole-known-source of illudium-phosdex, the-"shaving-cream-atom", in the-1952-merrie-melodies-sci-fi-parody-duck-dodgers in the-24½th-century.
planet-x-—-an-inhabited-planet of unknown-location in the-tom-swift,-jr.-juvenile-"tom-swift and the-visitor from planet-x" (1961).
planet-x-—-an-inhabited-planet of unknown-location in the-tom-swift,-jr.-juvenile-"tom-swift and the-visitor from planet-x" (1961).
a-fictional-world beyond pluto that appears in invasion of astro-monster aka
monster-zero aka-godzilla vs. monster-zero.
the-planet is largely barren on the-surface, with extensive-tunnels and advanced-technology, which has little-water, a-fact which causes its-people to attempt to invade earth using first-king-ghidorah, and later-godzilla and rodan as mind-controlled-weapons.
the-planet's-populations are depicted as largely despising human-emotion – violators of this-taboo are summarily executed.
the-members of the-species that had made the-planet's-populations way to earth appears to have been simultaneously destroyed when the-leader of the-civilization activated some-form of self-destruct-mechanism.
it is suggested at the-film's-end that the-planet still exists and that there is still a-remaining-population present there.
an-alternate-version of planet-x reappears in the-video-game godzilla: monster of monsters for the-nintendo-entertainment-system, depicted as fully mechanical, and having brought together a-legion of space monsters with which to invade earth.
the-planet's-inhabitants leave the-planet behind when godzilla, mothra, and the-forces of earth successfully defeat the-forces of earth armies and monsters.
a-third-version of the-people of planet-x, potentially from yet another-version of planet-x appear in the-video-game godzillagodzilla:
destroy all-monsters-melee, calling all-monsters-melee the-vortak, and appearing virtually identical to all-monsters-melee movie incarnation.
they again take control of a-force of monsters which the player – in the-form of the-only-monster not successfully placed under mental-control of the-vortak – must defeat.
polyphemus and pandora —
a-gas-giant and the-vortak inhabited moon in the-film-avatar (2009).
pop-star —
a-planet shaped like a-five-pointed-star that serves as the-main-setting of the-kirby-series.
a-planet orbiting three-stars in the-cartoon-visionaries: knights of the-magical-light.
an-inhabitable-planet whose-ecosystem, consisting of psychic-plants and animals, seems to be unremittingly hostile to human-life.
from harry-harrison's-deathworld-trilogy.
ragnarok — a-planet in tom-godwin's-space-prison (aka-the-survivors) and the-space-barbarians.
ragnarok's-inhabitants suffered from high-gravity, temperature-extremes, hell-fever, unfriendly-wildlife such as prowlers and unicorns, and a-dearth of natural-resources.
reach – a-human-colony in the-epsilon-eridani-system in the-halo-video-game-series.
regis-iii — a-planet populated by evolving-machines in stanisław-lem's-novel the-invincible.
a-planet from the-saturday-night-live-skit "coneheads.
requiem – an-artificial-planet constructed by the-ancient-forerunner in the-halo-game-series.
a-planet with extreme-social-division between the-haves and have-nots, in bruce-sterling's-the-artificial-kid.
riverworld —
the-title-planet of philip-josé-farmer's-riverworld-series, where all-humans in history are reincarnated along a-spiral-river.
rocheworld —
a-pair of twin-planets that almost touch in the-book of that-name by robert-forward.
rosetta – home-planet of rosemary and takeshi-shishidou, who fled to earth when it was invaded by the-black-star-army; in the-1979-japanese-tv-series honou no-choujin-megaloman (megaloman: superman of flame).
a-megalopolitan-planet plagued by constant-traffic-congestion, appearing in several-volumes of the-french-comic-book-series valérian and laureline, particularly in the-circles of power.
rylos – planet (along with earth) defended by alex-rogan in the-last-starfighter.
an-earthlike-planet in edmund-hamilton's-novel the-haunted-stars.
orbits the-star-altair, was once the-center of an-interstellar-empire, and is now mostly covered in a-forest of once-domesticated-trees.
a-planet ruled by a-cannibal-elite in norman-spinrad's-the-men in the-jungle.
sartorias-deles —
an-iron-age-magical-planet on which most of sherwood-smith's-stories take place.
a-planet in the-video-game
star-fox-adventures, where fox-mccloud meets krystal; revisited in star-fox: assault, where star-fox and krystal meet up with a-fully-grown-prince-tricky after star-fox clears the-area of the-aparoid-menace.
also called "dinosaur planet".
a-fictional-planet in raystorm.
seiren – a-planet where 90-percent of the-population is women.
sera — a-once-glorious-civilized-world devastated by wars in gears of war.
shikasta — doris lessing's shikasta (cosmic-consciousness) shora — joan-slonczewski's-a-door into ocean (waterbound-culture)
skaro — a-fictional-planet, home to the-daleks,-kaleds-and-thals-doctor-who.
silence – a-venue in the-f-zero-franchise known for being a-soundless-planet.
a-venue in the-f-zero-franchise known for being a-soundless-planet-track is the-last-course of the-knight-league in the-first-game.
smoke-ring — not a-planet, but a-habitable-gas-ring around a-neutron-star in larry-niven's-novels the-integral-trees and the smoke-ring.
a-planet covered by a-single-sentient-organism in the-book of that-name by stanisław-lem.
the-"planet of the-apes" in the-book of that-name by pierre-boulle and the-related-films and television-shows.
space-base-bullamanka —
an-australia-like-planet where a-larp-version of squid-tac-toe is played from 3-2-1-penguins!.
stroggos – the-planet on which the-games quake-ii and quake-iv take place.
sur'kesh —
the-homeworld of the-salarians from the-mass-effect-series.
the-homeworld of the-salarians from the-mass-effect-series is located in pranas-system.
sur'kesh is described as being covered in thick-jungle.
synobazz - featured in f-zero-maximum-velocity as a-venue shrouded in mystery.
this-giant-marsh is the-home of an-old-aristocratic,-enigmatic-society.
its-tracks includes the-explosive-and-championship-circuits, the latter of which is unique as its is the-only-track in the-game where the-player can save a-ghost as well as a-replay.
takis — the-home-planet of dr.-tachyon.
tallon-iv – planet from metroid-prime.
once home to the-ancient-chozo-civilization, now inhabited by space-pirates'-mining-operation.
tanis — destination of the-sleeper-ship elysium in the-film pandorum.
the-planet on which the computer game mercenary and targ —
sequels take place.
tau-volantis - the-main-setting for dead-space 3.
the-game's-characters mistake the-planet for the-marker-home-world.
within dead-space-lore,  the-inhabitants of tau-volantis found the-markers and used the-markers as an-energy-source two million years before humanity would do the same.
the-inhabitants of tau-volantis is located in an-unknown-system.
the-inhabitants of tau-volantis was originally an-ocean-planet before the-convergence-event forces the-tau-volantians to build a-machine to freeze the-inhabitants of tau-volantis, halting convergence and rendering the-inhabitants of tau-volantis as an-ice-planet.
telos---home-planet of the-cybermen seen in the-moonbase, the-tomb of the-cybermen, the-wheel in space, and the-invasion.
tencton — the-home-planet of extraterrestrials in the-series and movie alien-nation.
terminus is a-planet at the-edge of the-galaxy in isaac-asimov's-foundation-series, home of the-foundation (later-capital of the-foundation federation).
thalassa — a-watery-planet colonized by earth, and revisited by a-ship travelling to the-planet sagan 2 in arthur-c.-clarke's-novel
the-songs of distant-earth.
the-third-planet from the-black-hole:
a-fictional-world mentioned in godzilla vs. mechagodzilla in 1974.
the-planet is home to a-form of ape-like-creatures which can take on a-disguise to resemble humans that typically fades after death.
the-planet is slowly being sucked into a-black-hole, which forced their-species to attempt to conquer earth by the-use of a-mechanical-doppelganger of godzilla; mechagodzilla.
their-return in 1978's-terror of mechagodzilla having reconstructed the-machine and enlisting the-aid of a-scientist whose-daughter their saved in order to gain the-services of a-massive-kaiju named titanosaurus, in an-attempt to defeat godzilla and finally begin their-invasion of earth as their-own-world is now in critical-danger.
their-fate is left ambiguous after terror of mechagodzilla.
an-alternate-version of the-species appears in the dark horse comics run of godzilla, with similar-intentions for the-conquest of earth and for similar-reasons.
in the-comics,  in the-comics help to develop cybersaur (a-mechagodzilla stand-in) and the-all-terraintula, a-spider-like-mecha.
both were designed for the-purpose of battling godzilla, whom both perceived as both-greatest-threat to conquest of earth.
a-planet of the-star epsilon-eridani inhabited by an-intelligent-native-avian-species and earth-colonists in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
a-planet of the-star procyon inhabited by a-species of anarchic,-bisexual-"teddy-bears" in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
the-world of the-dark-crystal.
an-oceanic-planet whose-sun orbits a-black-hole, socially divided into two-moieties (summer and winter), ruled by a-queen with abrupt-changes in social-conditions every 150 years.
from joan-d.-vinge's-the-snow-queen.
tirol — the-homeworld of the-robotech-masters in the-anime-robotech.
the-setting of the-fighting-fantasy-gamebooks; not to be confused with titan —.
tormance —
a-planet orbiting arcturus in david-lindsay's-novel, a-voyage to arcturus.
tralfamadore —
a-planet populated by the-phlegmatic-tralfamadorians in the-works of kurt-vonnegut.
tran – the-main-setting of jerry-pournelle's-janissaries-series.
tranai – the-utopian-planet from robert-sheckley's-novella a-ticket to tranai, where very unorthodox methods, such as legalizing street-robbery and granting each-citizen a-right to murder a-planet populated by the-phlegmatic-tralfamadorians in the-works of kurt-vonnegut's-president, are practiced to maintain a-free-society.
trantor is a-planet in isaac-asimov's-foundation-series-and-empire-series of science-fiction-novels.
tristane – a-planet in nina-allan's-novel, the-rift-tschai — the-sole-planet of carina 4269,
212-light-years from earth, slightly larger than terra and populated by three-alien-races, one-sentient-native-species and various-human-races, as described in "planet of adventure" by jack-vance.
a-planet lit by two-fixed-suns, both fixed relative to it, in the-little-big-adventure-computer-games.
twinsun has three-climates: the-poles are hot and desert, the-equator is cold and arctic, and between the-poles lie temperate-lands.
the-home-planet of thermoman from my-hero ===
valyanop —
a-kig-yar-interplanetary-colony from the-halo-series.
setting of the-video-game killzone.
vegeta – home-world of the-saiyans in dragon-ball-z before being destroyed by freeza
venom – a-harsh-decaying-world from the-star-fox-(series)
vinea — setting of many of the-yoko-tsuno-graphic-novels vishnu — a-planet of the-star tau-ceti inhabited by two-primitive-intelligent-species, the-ape-like-romeli and the-centaur-like-dzlieri, in l.-sprague-de-camp's-viagens-interplanetarias-series.
vhilinyar — setting of many-books in the-acorna-series
w === wait-
your-turn — a-planet inhabited by vacuum-cleaner-like-aliens from 3-2-1-penguins!.
the-water-covered-planet from the-cartoon-series-tigersharks.
worlorn – a-wandering-planet that is the-setting for george-r.-r.-martin's-novel-dying of the-light.
in the-role playing game-rifts, a-chaotic-planet in another-plane.
wormwood is alive, and wormwood inhabitants can draw on wormwood life force.
zahir – a-hollow-planet appearing in the-comic-book-series valérian and laureline.
zarathustra – the-setting for the-fuzzy-books of h.-beam-piper's-terro-human-future-history.
zarkon – home-planet of philo, tv-station-engineer in the-film-uhf.
zavron –-home-planet of the zavronian aliens in the-abc-tv-sitcom ' the-neighbors'-zebes – a-planet from the-metroid-series that was once home to the-chozo-bird-people but now home to the-space-pirates.
zeelich – a-planet covered by a-thick-layer of gas-clouds above a-sea of lava in the-computer-game little-big-adventure 2.
vegetation and civilization occur only on mountains rising above the-cloud-layer.
zeist – a-planet that is the-origin of the-immortals in the-movie highlander-ii:
the-quickening.
zillikian –
a-counter-earth in the-bunduki-series by j.-t.-edson.
zyrgon---a-planet ruled by the-galactic-"law-enforcers" in novels by robin-klein, adapted as a-television-series.
other-lists == ===
parallel-earths ===
these-planets are identical or nearly identical to earth physically, but have a-history that differs to some-degree from that of earthearth.
strangereal — from the-ace-combat-series featuring different-countries and continents.
terra-obscura —
in the-terra-obscura-comic-book.
planets of the-solar-system ===
solar-system in fiction:
real-planets of the-solar-system have that have been utilized or characterized in a-variety of fictional-ways (e.g.-edgar-rice-burroughs'-barsoom, a-fictional-version of mars).
fictional-planets of the-solar-system : planets said to be located within the-solar-system that, in reality, may not exist, do not exist, or have never existed.
artificial-planets ===
some-writers, scientists and artists have speculated about artificial-worlds or planet-equivalents;  artificial-planets ==
include: dyson-sphere — freeman-dyson-gaea — john-varley-globus-cassus —
christian-waldvogel-hegira —
an-artificial-planet in the-novel of the-same-name by greg-bear.
an-artificial-environment made by the-protector jack-brennan in the-novel-protector by larry-niven.
obelisk-planet" — stargate-universe-onyx —
a-forerunner created shield-world which is the-main-setting of the-novel.
orbital (the-culture) – from ian-bank's-"culture"-series; 10-million-kilometer-rings which spin to simulate gravity and orbit a-star like a-planet.
pendor — elf-sternberg-planet-x — an-artificial-planet in the-video-game-escape from the-planet of the-robot-monsters (1989)
ringworld — larry-niven
septerra —
a-planet with seven-layers of floating-continents.
from the-video-game septerra-core.
shell-world
(culture)---planet-sized-objects which contain many-layers of concentric-shells, each of which is a-habitable-environment with a-complete-atmosphere.
heat and light provided by fusion-reactors attached or rolling across each-"ceiling".
strata — a-novel by terry-pratchett, includes an-unnamed-artificial-flat-world.
fantastic-planets ===
some-invented-planets have physically-impossible-shapes, and may be regarded as fantasy-worlds: discworld —-a-flat,-disc-shaped-"planet", supported on the-backs of giant-elephants riding on a-turtle, in terry pratchett's discworld series.
world of tiers — a-planet-sized-step-pyramid with a-different-environment on each-step, in philip-josé-farmer's-book-series of the-same-name.
comic-planets ===
these-planets are not so-much-carefully-constructed-worlds as these-planets are not so-much-carefully-constructed-worlds as they are humorous-backgrounds or gag-references in various-comedy-shows and games:
arazon — a-prison-planet featured in the-comic-novel-bikini-planet by david-s.-garnett are humorous-backgrounds or gag-references in various-comedy-shows and games:
arazon — a-prison-planet featured in the-comic-novel-bikini-planet by david-s.-garnett.
it is colliquially known as "clink".
dave and alvin – twin-planets in solar-orbit beyond pluto on the-tv show alf (episode #24, weird-science).
druidia — home of the-druids, ruled by king-roland and princess-vespa in the-film spaceballs.
freleng — zadavia's-and-optimatus'-homeworld in the-animated-series loonatics-unleashed.
the-name is an-homage to animator-friz-freleng.
a-planet visited in the-british-claymation-series rex the-runt.
all-the-inhabitants of a-planet visited in the-british-claymation-series rex the-runt are sapient-plant-pots who are all called gordon, with the-exception of one named john.
a-planet visited in the-british-claymation-series rex the-runt is referenced frequently but is never actually seen.
hideaway —
an-"entertainment-planet" appearing in the-comic-novel-bikini-planet by david-s.-garnett, and briefly in the-precursor-novel stargonauts.
a-version of earth in which everything is backwards, in the-sci-fi-television-comedy-red-dwarf.
jupiter two —
a-planet mentioned by name in spaceballs.
a-planet mentioned by name in spaceballs is mentioned as being close to druidia, but a-planet mentioned by name in spaceballs is not actually shown on-screen.
koozebane — a-mysterious-planet full of weird-aliens, encountered several times in the-television-puppet-comedy
the-muppet-show.
kukurikabu —
a-scalene-ellipsoid-planet from the-philippine-comedy-fantasy-series, kokey @
it is populated by the-kukurikabukan-race.
marklar — a-planet that appeared in four-episodes of the-animated-television-series south-park, most prominently in starvin'-marvin in space, where all-nouns are replaced by the-word 'marklar'.
the-home-planet of the-alien-gordon-shumway in the-television-situation-comedy-alf.
the-home-planet of the-humanoid-alien-mork in the-television-situation-comedy-mork & mindy.
planet-x —
the-home-planet of the-alien-gordon-shumway in the-television-situation-comedy-alf.
planet-x — the-source of alludium-phosdex, the-shaving-cream-atom, in the-1953-animated-short-comedy-film-duck-dodgers in the-24½th-century.
the-home-planet of the-aliens in the-comedy-sketches (and film)
the-coneheads.
rigel-iv —
the-home-planet of drooling aliens-kang and kodos on the-animated-comedy the-simpsons.
rimmerworld —
a-planet populated by millions of clones of arnold-rimmer who had spent six-hundred-years alone on this-planet, creating clones of arnold-rimmer in a-failed-attempt to create a-girlfriend.
from red-dwarf.
shroob-planet —
the-(assumed)-homeworld of the-alien-shroobs in the-video-game mario & luigi: partners in time.
skyron — planet in the-andromeda-galaxy, home of immense-blancmanges, in a-monty-python's-flying-circus-comedy-sketch.
spaceball — planet of the spaceballs, ruled by president-skroob in the-movie
spaceballs, where it has no-atmosphere.
a-metafictional-planet mentioned in ed, edd n eddy, mentioned as the-setting for the-(fictional)-horror-film
i was a-teenage-appetiser from planet-sushi: the second coming.
thargoidia — the-homeworld of the-thargoids in the-captain-kremmen-series by kenny-everett.
the-city of gortadia is the-planetary-capital-city.
a-planet seen in an-episode of rex the-runt.
a-planet seen in an-episode of rex the-runt is merely an-asteroid with a-lecture-hall at a-planet seen in an-episode of rex the-runt north pole, and the-inhabitants all resemble the-easter-island-statues.
in the-film spaceballs, the-spaceship-eagle-5-crash-lands on the-desert-moon of vega – after running out of fuel.
xenon — the-home-planet of roger-wilco, janitor, in the-humorous-computer-game-series space-quest.
yekok –-home-planet of protagonist, kokey from the-filipino-series kokey @
yugopotamia — a-comic-"opposite"-planet in the-oort-cloud mentioned in the-animated-comedy the-fairly-oddparents.
comins, neil f.
what if the-moon didn't exist.
gillette, stephen.
world-building.
writer's-digest-books.
stableford, brian.
the-dictionary of science-fiction-places.
see also ==
hypothetical-planet-planetary-habitability
terrestrial-planet ===
similar-fictions ===
fantasy-world-fictional-country
fictional-universe-list of fantasy-worlds-solar-system in fiction
stars and planetary-systems in fiction ===
fan-fiction ===
alternate-universe-expanded-universe
references ==
finn (designation fn-2187) is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise.
a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise first appeared in the-2015-film star-wars:
the-force awakens as a-first-order-stormtrooper who, shocked by the-order's-cruelty in the-force awakens first-combat-mission, flees and joins forces with rey and later-the-resistance.
he is portrayed by english-actor-john-boyega, who reprised the-role in star-wars: the-last-jedi and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
boyega's-performance and the-character have received praise.
for his-performance in the force awakens, boyega won the-bafta-rising-star-award, and was nominated for the-saturn-award for best-actor.
casting and creation ==
the-idea for the-character, whose-name during early-pre-production was sam, came from screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan.
colleague-michael-arndt, who prepared an-early-draft of the force awakens, said:
and then we were struggling to figure out who the-male-lead was going to be.
i remember we talked about pirates and merchant-marines and all-this-stuff, and finally larry-[kasdan] got pissed at all of we and
larry-[kasdan]'s just like, "
you guys, you're not thinking big.
what if he's a-stormtrooper that ran away?
for the-roles of finn and other-new-star-wars-characters for the force awakens, director-j.-j.-abrams intentionally looked for unknown-actors, as director-j.-j.-abrams wanted audiences "to meet these-characters [in the-film] and not feel like the-film
he from that-thing
, the-film’s her from that-thing. "
boyega, who had impressed abrams in abrams debut role in british-sci-fi-film-attack the-block (2011), was invited to audition for the-role of finn, a-process which lasted seven months before abrams was finally cast.
kathleen-kennedy, one of the-producers of the force awakens, stated: john-boyega was somebody we'd known of because of attack the-block.
and we'd been sort of putting john-boyega on the-top of we list right from the-beginning.
but, then again, we went on a-massive-search just to see who was out there, and we kept coming back to realizing that john would be the-perfect-finn.
finn's-stormtrooper-code-name, fn-2187, is a-reference to the-number of the-cell in which princess-leia was detained in the-original-1977-film star-wars. "
cell 2187", in turn, references arthur-lipsett's-short-film 21-87.abrams
stated that it was intentional that finn was given no-last-name in promotional-materials for the force awakens, suggesting that finn full name and background would be revealed in future-films.
however, the-film itself revealed that "finn" is an-adopted-name, derived from his-stormtrooper-number.
in 2021 whilst promoting the-film cherry, marvel-cinematic-universe-actor-tom-holland revealed marvel-cinematic-universe-actor-tom-holland had also auditioned for the-role of finn before boyega was cast.
appearances ==
the-force awakens ===
finn, originally designated "fn-2187", is an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver).
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) was taken from an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) family at a-young-age and sold to the-first-order to become a-part of his-family ever-expanding-army.
an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) was trained for most an-ex-first-order-stormtrooper who served under captain-phasma (gwendoline-christie) and kylo-ren (adam-driver) life to be an-effective,-loyal,-and-merciless-soldier.
in spite of finn-training, finn becomes disillusioned with the-first-order during finn first combat mission on the-planet jakku.
finn is traumatized when a-fellow-stormtrooper dies in front of finn, and is later horrified when ren, having failed to secure the-map that will lead to the-missing-luke-skywalker (mark-hamill), orders finn squadron to massacre a-village of jakku-civilians.
the-other-stormtroopers follow ren's-order without hesitation.
finn, however, lowers finn weapon, aghast, in a-silent-but-firm-refusal.
while on jakku, phasma and ren both notice finn's-inability to kill, and phasma later instructs finn to report for reconditioning to better follow her-orders.
instead of heeding her-word, finn resolves to flee the-first-order, and convinces the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) to aid the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) in the-captured-resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac) escape.
with poe piloting a-stolen-tie-fighter, the two escape from aboard the-finalizer—the-resurgent-class-star-destroyer where poe was being held prisoner.
while piloting,-poe-dubs-fn-2187-"finn" (from the-"fn" in his-designation), which the-otherwise-nameless-stormtrooper embraces.
moments after, their-tie-fighter is shot down by the-finalizer's-turrets and crash-lands back on jakku.
when finn comes to, finn searches for poe in the-wreckage, but is only able to find the-pilot's-jacket before the-shattered-hull of their-ship is swallowed by an-enormous-sinkhole.
finn assumes that poe is dead.
alone, finn decides to search for civilization, and dons poe's-jacket in place of finn own stormtrooper armor.
poe's-astromech-droid bb-8, now in the-care of the-junk-scavenger rey (daisy-ridley), recognizes the-jacket that finn is wearing belongs to poe.
rey assumes finn to be a-member of the-resistance after mentioning that bb-8 has a-partially-completed-map leading to luke.
finn goes along with luke-mistaken-assumption, hoping that luke will help finn get bb-8 to the-resistance.
the three of them escape the-first-order with help from han-solo (harrison-ford) and chewbacca (peter-mayhew).
han takes han to han friend maz kanata (lupita-nyong’o) on takodana, who promises to take han to the-resistance.
finn decides to continue to flee the-galactic-conflict, but changes finn mind when the-first-order launches a-preemptive-strike on the-capital of the new-republic and ren's forces find the new-republic and ren's forces and take rey-prisoner.
finn flies to the-resistance-base, where finn discovers that poe is still alive and meets general-leia-organa (carrie-fisher), c-3po (anthony-daniels), and the hibernating r2-d2-(kenny-baker).
finn reveals some-details about the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base, and claims to be able to disable some-details about the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base shields.
when he arrives on the-planet with han and chewbacca, however, finn reveals that finn only worked in the-base's-sanitation-section.
nevertheless, the-team takes phasma-hostage and finn forces phasma at gunpoint to disable the-shields.
this allows the-resistance to attack, led by poe.
the-resistance meet up with rey, who has freed phasma from captivity.
later, finn watches in horror with the-others as ren kills han.
ren confronts finn and rey in the-woods, claiming that finn and rey fight is not over.
finn picks up luke’s-old-lightsaber after rey is knocked out by  ren and tries to fight  ren, but  ren easily overpowers  ren and knocks  ren unconscious.
rey stops  ren from killing finn, and rey and chewbacca escape starkiller-base in the-millennium-falcon and bring the comatose finn to the-resistance-base for medical-care.
related-works and merchandising ====
finn is featured in star-wars: before the-awakening (2015) by greg-rucka, an-anthology-book for young-readers that focuses on the-lives of poe, rey and finn before the-events of the force awakens.
finn is also a-point of view-character in the-2015-novelization of the force awakens by alan-dean-foster.
finn is a-playable-character in disney-infinity 3.0, voiced by boyega.
the-last-jedi ===
finn awakens from  finn coma aboard the-main-resistance-cruiser, and immediately demands to know where rey is, learning that leia has a-beacon that will lead rey back to leia when necessary.
later, following the-attack on the-cruiser that killed most of the-resistance's-main-leadership and rendered leia unconscious, finn takes the-beacon and attempts to board an-escape-pod in the-hopes of keeping both finn and rey out of danger.
before finn can board the-pod, finn is found by rose-tico (kelly-marie-tran), a-maintenance-worker whose sister paige, a-bomber for the-resistance, has recently died in an-attack on the-first-order.
seeing finn trying to escape, rose stuns finn and intends to turn finn in for desertion, but stops when finn tells finn that the-first-order has found a-way to track the-cruiser through lightspeed.
finn tells finn that finn might be able to disable the-tracker, and finn says that, having worked aboard a-star-destroyer, finn would be able to find where the-tracker is.
rose and finn run rose and finn plan by poe, who contacts kanata for help, but finn claims that finn is too busy and instructs rose and finn to find a-"master-code-breaker" in a-casino in canto-bight, a-resort-city on planet-cantonica.
operating against acting-resistance-leader-vice-admiral-holdo’s
(laura-dern) wishes, finn and rose, along with bb-8, steal a-ship and go to canto-bight.
finn is initially entranced by the-lavish-lifestyle of the-casino, but becomes disillusioned when rose tells finn that most of the-people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the-first-order.
while they find the-master-code-breaker, they are unable to recruit finn as they are arrested and jailed for a-parking-violation.
in they cell they meet dj (benicio-del-toro), a-thief and codebreaker who offers to help they; they refuse, but finn nonetheless breaks they out of their-cell.
finn and rose-escape from the-prison, where they set free a-horde of horse-like-racing-creatures called fathiers, escaping atop one of they.
outside the-casino they are greeted by bb-8-and-dj, having stolen a-ship together.
dj agrees to help they, despite finn’s-misgivings.
eventually, finn, rose, and dj arrive aboard the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy and disguise themselves as first-order-officers; finn finds the-location of the-tracker and dj breaks themselves in, but before rose is able to disable the-tracker themselves are caught by phasma.
upon being captured, dj, having overheard the-resistance's-plan of escaping to crait via transports, secretly tells the-first-order of the-plans in exchange for money and his-freedom, and finn and rose are to be executed.
before   are, holdo rams the-resistance-cruiser into supreme-leader-snoke’s
(andy-serkis)-flagship at lightspeed, damaging the-ship and sending the-ship into chaos.
finn has a-one-on-one-fight with phasma, ending with finn proudly declaring finn "rebel scum" before phasma falls to her-demise.
bb-8, aboard a-first-order-at-st, rescues finn and rose from stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to crait aboard a-damaged-shuttle.
as the-first-order prepares an-attack on the-formerly-abandoned-rebel-base on crait, finn recognizes the-weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the-blast-doors and leads a-small-strike on the-first-order with the-intention of disabling the-cannon.
the-attack goes poorly, and poe orders all-fighters to retreat, but finn is determined to destroy the-cannon and flies directly into the-blast, planning to sacrifice finn to defeat the-first-order.
at the-last-second, rose stops finn by ramming her-speeder into finn, pushing finn out of the-blast.
finn asks her why her stopped finn, and her tells finn that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;" her then kisses finn before falling unconscious.
finn brings her-body back to the-rebel-base and summons a-medic for her.
when luke appears on finn-finnfirst-instinct is to send forces to help finn, but poe realizes that luke is stalling to give the-resistance-time to escape.
finn and poe lead the-resistance off the-planet.
finn finally reunites with rey, and embraces finn before boarding the-millennium-falcon.
finn is last seen putting a-blanket over the-still-unconscious-rose.
related-works and merchandising ====
finn is a-playable-hero in star-wars-battlefront-ii, voiced by boyega.
finn was added through the-dlc of the-last-jedi.
finn's-outfit in the-rise of skywalker-update.
the-rise of skywalker
finn, along with poe, intercepts a-message from a-first-order-mole that emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an-attack on the-resistance and the-new-republic in the-form of the-final-order, a-massive-fleet of xyston-class-star-destroyers designed by the-sith-eternal.
finn then leaves along with rey, poe, c-3po, and chewbacca to the-desert-planet of pasaana, where with the-help of lando-calrissian (billy-dee-williams)
rey, poe, c-3po, and chewbacca locate a-dagger that contains a-clue to a-sith-wayfinder, a-compass to the-sith-planet-exegol.
throughout the-whole-journey,  finn clearly has something  finn wants to tell rey, but is unable to find the-time to tell  finn.
the-whole-journey takes rey, poe, c-3po, and chewbacca to kijimi, where the-location of the-wayfinder is extracted from c-3po's memory files, and later to the-resurgent-class-star-destroyer-steadfast, where  finn and poe go to rescue chewbacca, who was taken by the-first-order.
in the-process, finn and poe are captured by stormtroopers and set to be executed, but finn and poe are rescued by general-hux (domnhall-gleeson), who reveals that he is the-mole.
going free, finn and poe rescue rey aboard the-millennium-falcon and head to the-endor-system, where the-wayfinder is located among the-wreckage of the-second-death-star.
on kef-bir, finn and poe rescue-rey encounter a-group allied with the-resistance, led by a-woman named jannah (naomi ackie).
finn gets to know jannah, who reveals that finn and the-entire-settlement on kef-bir are former-stormtroopers who mutinied after a-battle.
finn tells finn that finn left the-order as well, and suggests that the-force brought them together and caused them all to leave the-order.
finn and jannah follow rey aboard the-wreckage to try and stop her from confronting ren, but her does so and nearly kills ren before healing ren and leaving aboard ren's ship.
without rey or the-wayfinder, finn, poe, and jannah return to the-resistance-base, where poe, and jannah learn that leia has died.
poe is named acting general, and poe appoints finn as co-general.
finn learns of exegol's-whereabouts based on rey's-transmissions, and finn and poe lead a-strike against the-sith-eternal-forces, with finn and jannah specifically leading a-ground-attack on the-surface of the-steadfast to take out he and poe navigation.
as the-attack nears the-attack end, finn and jannah are left on the-surface of the-damaged-resurgent-star-destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by lando and chewbacca in the-millennium-falcon and the-rest of the-resistance-fleet; finn attributes finn faith in finn being rescued to a-belief in the-force.
following the-successful-attack, finn celebrates among the-rebels on the-resistance-base, reuniting with rey and poe.
the lego star wars holiday special ===
finn, having revealed what finn was going to tell rey to be of finn own realization of being force sensitive, is now training under rey as rey jedi padawan.
rey accidentally hurts finn's-feelings during a-training-session, making finn use a-wooden-toy-lightsaber instead of rey own.
rey seeks out a-path leading  rey to the-world between worlds, allowing  rey to travel through time.
meanwhile, finn plans for life-day-celebrations with poe, jannah, rose and lando, as they await the-arrival of chewbacca's-family.
during her-travels,  rey learns from yoda's-ghost that patience and understanding is an-important-part of teaching a-padawan; finn is shown to have prevented the-life-day-tree from falling by using finn wooden lightsaber.
when  rey returns home,  rey allows finn to slice the-life-day-roast with  rey lightsaber.
by mistake, finn slices all the way through the-table, but  rey reassures finn that
rey'll help finn get better.
character ==
when asked about finn's-character-traits, boyega replied, i think the-element of having to step up to a-bigger-calling, when your-circumstances don't particularly reflect that.
because i'm young, at the-beginning of my-life; you haven't really achieved much, and then you have to do that-whole-adulthood-thing, get responsible,
work and all of that-stuff, no-more-mommy and daddy taking care of things.
i feel like it's the-same-kind of journey that finn has when finn leaves the-first-order.
finn leaves a-curriculum, finn leaves a-system and embarks on finn own journey.
finn also noted that initially "most of finn decisions are based on adrenaline.
like, 'okay, you know what?
i'm just going to get this-blaster and run away.'
" boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the-character in over his-head and someone who is just dropped into an-extraordinary-circumstance, the-scenes and the-script prove that
and it's not a-problem that can just be erased.
finn was originally going to be accompanied to canto-bight by poe in the-last-jedi, but writer/director-rian-johnson found the-storyline flat when writer/director-rian-johnson realized their-dialogue was interchangeable.
this led to the-creation of the-character rose-tico, who would challenge and contrast with finn.
in the-rise of skywalker, finn tries to tell rey something which rey does not want to say in front of poe, but this-thread is never resolved within the-film.
this was implied to involve him confessing him loved her, but boyega denied this on twitter.
the-novelization of the-film reveals that finn is force-sensitive, implying this to be what him intended to tell rey.
abrams later confirmed that finn was indeed force-sensitive shortly after the-film's-premiere.
the-novelization of the-film also states that rey believes this as well, speculating on the-kind of jedi-jedi could become.
reception ==
the-character and boyega's-portrayal were praised; reviewer-jamie-graham wrote, "of the-new-triangle of characters, boyega brings intensity and surprisingly-honed-comic-timing."
reviewers also praised finn's-relationships with the-other-characters: the dynamic between rey and finn is something new for star-wars, with her-bright-eyed-heroism complementing boyega's-roguish-wit...
gone is the-clunky-dialogue of the-prequels—instead, it's replaced by some-seriously-clever-writing that often leads to nice-little-moments, many with han and finn.
drew-mcweeny of hitfix-notes, "boyega has this-great-combination of self-interested-fear and reluctant-heroism that he plays beautifully, and he charts finn's-evolution as a-person expertly here."
peter-travers of rolling-stone described the-character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
robbie-collin writes that boyega has a-"(very-funny)-half-brave,-half-anxious,-would-be-heroic-schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", finn "only wants to be thought of as the-daring-freedom-fighter
he's not quite sure he's cut out to be."
some-reviewers were less than positive, however.
ty-burr of the-boston-globe wrote that "boyega's-finn is the-new-movie's-one-weak-link, a-character who vacillates between noble-impulses and cowardice until our-interest drops away.
the-performance is fine
but it's just fine, with little of the-iconic-bite a wagnerian cartoon like this needs.
the-character was also subject to racist-reactions by some-fans online, to which boyega responded, "i'm not going to lose sleep over people."
after the-first-trailer premiered, boyega responded to critics with, "to whom " may concern ...
get used to "", and further commented that, "all-the-films i've done have had a-secret-commentary on stereotypical-mentalities.
it's about getting people to drop a-prejudiced-state of mind and realise, 'oh shit we're just watching normal-people.' "
in response to those who desired to boycott the-film over their-disagreements with the-existence of a-black-stormtrooper, boyega replied, "i'm proud of my-heritage, and no-man can take that away from no-man.
i wasn't raised to fear people with a-difference of opinion.
people with a-difference of opinion are merely victims of a-disease in people with a-difference of opinion-mind.
"in 2016, boyega was nominated for the-saturn-award for best-actor for the-saturn-award for best-actor portrayal of finn.
references == ==
external-links ==
finn in the starwars.com databank finn on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki finn on imdb-lego-star-wars:
the-video-game (sometimes simply called lego star wars) is a-lego-themed,-action-adventure-video-game based on the-lego-star-wars-line of toys, and the-first-installment in the-lego-video-game-franchise developed by traveller's-tales, which would develop all-future-lego-titles from that-point on.
the-video-game (sometimes simply called lego star wars) was first released on 29-march 2005, and is a-video-game-adaptation of the-star-wars-prequel trilogy:
the-phantom-menace (1999), attack of the-clones (2002) and revenge of the-sith (2005), with a-bonus-level from a-new-hope (1977).
it is the-only-traveller's-tales developed lego-title that was rated everyone by the-esrb for consoles, with most-subsequent-handheld-versions of traveller's-tales-lego-video-games receiving such-a-rating; while further-console-versions of traveller's-tales-lego-video-games received the-everyone-10+-rating.
further-console-versions of traveller's-tales-lego-video-games received the-everyone 10+ rating was developed by traveller's-tales for the-microsoft-xbox, sony-playstation-2-video-game-consoles, and microsoft-windows-personal-computers, with griptonite-games developing the-nintendo-game-boy-advance-version.
these-initial-versions were published in april 2005.
a-mac-version, developed by aspyr, was released in august 2005.
a-nintendo-gamecube-version of the-game was released on 25-october 2005.
these-initial-versions were published by eidos-interactive and giant-interactive-entertainment, with star-wars-assets licensed through lucasarts.
gameplay ==
gameplay in lego-star-wars is geared towards family-play, and does not feature a-game-over-scenario.
given a-specific-set of characters in each-scenario, based on a-scene from each of the-movies, up-to-two-players can control to two-players, using to two-players different-abilities.
by walking up to another-friendly-character, the-player can switch control over to another-friendly-character; this-interaction is necessary in order to use another-character's-abilities to complete certain-puzzles.
lego-studs, small-coin-like-collectibles which serve as the-game's-currency, can be collected by finding lego-studs, small-coin-like-collectibles which serve as the-game's-currency, smashing or using the-force on certain-objects, or defeating enemies.
studs increase in value based on color
, silver is the least valuable at only-10-points, going up to gold, valued at 100-points, blue at 1000, and the rarest, purple worth 10,000.
players also have a-health-meter consisting of four-hearts that gets depleted if players get injured or shot at.
when players lose all players hearts, players character is broken apart and players lose studs (
as opposed to lives).
these-studs can be spent on unlocking new-characters for free-play-mode, hints for playing the-game, and cheats.
certain-segments of the-game-feature-players controlling spaceships flying on a-flat-plane.
there are also several-minikit-canisters hidden throughout each-level that, when collected, combine to form a-vehicle.
when the-player first starts the-game, the-player must first complete chapter i of the-phantom-menace
("negotiations").
however, once that-chapter is completed, the-player may choose to play any-unlocked-levels from the-other-two-movies in the-other-two-movies desired-order.
completing all-the-game's-levels with full-stud-bars will unlock an-additional-chapter based on the-opening-scene of a-new-hope, which features a-'prototype'-darth-vader, who uses anakin's-fighting-style, and a-stormtrooper whose-movements are identical to the-clone-troopers (both of these are remodeled in the-next-game).
the-background-music is the-same-music used in the-star-wars-movies, but as the-game was released before episode-iii's-soundtrack, music from the-original-trilogy (1977, 1980 and 1983) was used for that-movie's-levels.
for instance, the-alternate-soundtrack for the-"binary-sunset" was used in the-second-chapter of episode-iii, while "the-battle of endor i" was used in chapter vi, "princess-leia's-theme" for chapter-v and
"the-battle of yavin" was used in chapters 1 and 3.
in the-complete-saga, the-tracks that played during gameplay of that-episode were replaced with ones from episode-iii, although the-original-trilogy-music remained in that-episode's cutscenes.
characters ===
lego-star-wars contains a-total of 59-playable-characters for lego-star-wars; 56 in the-gamecube, ps2, xbox, and pc-versions.
the three missing are gungan, tusken-raider, and stap, playable in the-gba-version, though the-gungan and stap are only available through cheat-codes.
the-playable-characters are modeled like actual-lego-parts and, on dying,  the-playable-characters fall to pieces and also lose studs.
there is a-wide-variety of characters included in the-game, all of which are unlocked by completing levels or by purchasing all of which at dexter's-diner.
characters are divided into groups according to certain-skills.
for instance, jedi and sith can double-jump, use lightsabers, and have control of the-force, which they can use to activate or lift lego-objects or defeat certain-enemies.
darth-maul has a-double-ended-lightsaber which improves darth-maul defence from laser-fire.
jar-jar-binks, general-grievous and his-bodyguard have the-super-jump, which allows  jar-jar-binks, general-grievous and his-bodyguard to reach obstacles that the-jedi and sith can not jump to.
characters like padmé-amidala and clone-troopers, who carry blasters, have the-ability to grapple to reach higher-places.
droids, while unarmed, can travel through the-game without being intentionally attacked by enemy-characters.
protocol-droids and astromech-droids can open special-doors.
characters such as boba-fett and young-anakin can fit into tight-places.
every-character, other than the-pk-droid, gonk-droid (whose-only-ability is that they are never killed by enemies), and chancellor-palpatine, has a-special-ability.
unlocked-characters can be imported into the-game's-sequel, lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy, as an extra called "use old-save", which costs 250,000-lego-studs, and can be used in the-original-trilogy character creator function.
because the-game is based on the-prequel-trilogy (1999, 2002, 2005), luke-skywalker, han-solo, lando-calrissian and other-characters from the-original-star-wars-trilogy (1977, 1980 and 1983) are not shown, and appear in the-sequel-lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy.
however, if the-player unlocks the-last-level (an-episode-4-preview), darth-vader, a-stormtrooper, a-rebel-trooper and princess-leia become available.
original-trilogy characters chewbacca, obi-wan-kenobi, yoda, c-3po, and
r2-d2 are unlockable in the-game since r2-d2 appear in the-prequel trilogy also.
free-play ===
once a-non-vehicle-level has been cleared in story-mode, the-player may play through a-non-vehicle-level again in free-play-mode.
in free-play-mode, players can choose to play through the-level with players-choice of unlocked-characters randomly selected by the-program based on players-abilities.
at any-point, the-player can rotate instantly between each of the-chosen-characters to access areas not accessible during the-story-mode and obtain hidden-extras.
no story cut scenes appear in the-story-mode.
dexter's-diner ===
dexter's diner === is the-area where the-player chooses what-level to enter, or they can enter the-parking-lot to view any-vehicles whose-parts they have found and pieced together.
the-parts to any-vehicles whose-parts they have found and pieced together are contained in 10-mini-kit-canisters which are hidden throughout each-level.
battles often take place in the-parking-lot between canon-good-and-canon-evil-characters, such as jedi and sith, respectively.
at the-diner-counter, the-player may purchase, or enter codes, to unlock extras in exchange for lego-studs they have collected by playing through the-levels.
game-boy-advance-version ===
the-game-boy-advance-version behaves differently than the-console-versions.
the-game-boy-advance-version is played from an-isometric-perspective with only-one-player, who controls one of 15-playable-characters through story-scenarios across the-prequel-trilogy, battling enemies, completing objectives and getting from one-place to another.
the-levels are not evenly divided across the-three-episodes, with episode-ii having the-fewest-levels.
each-level is divided into multiple-sections that serve as checkpoints should the-player's-character fall apart, and players are given a-longer-health-meter that players must prevent from depleting to continue.
each-character possesses a-special-ability that is constrained by a-stamina-meter not found in the-console-version.
players can also find jawas in certain-levels who can award the-player-health or stamina-upgrades, as well as a-maintenance-droid that can save players once from death once at the-price of currently-collected-studs in a-level.
all-boss-battles are primarily against villains with lightsabers, and call for heavy-button mashing to win, especially when players can exclusively get caught in lightsaber-blade-locks that must be won to inflict extra-damage.
other-characters have different-attack-abilities that are not in the-console-versions, such as blaster-wielding-characters able to fire charged-shots and astromech-droids being able to drop proton-mines that would damage enemies on contact.
players are also encouraged to use other-characters'-abilities in free-play to discover secret-areas and find death-star-plans, which replace minikits in the-console-version.
at the-end of each-level, players are rewarded and ranked for how-many-enemies-players defeated, how-many-blaster-bolts-players deflected, how-many-studs-players collected and how many death-star-plans-players found.
the-plot of the-game is a-humorous-retelling of star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones, and star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, as well as a-bonus-level with the-opening of star-wars:
new-hope from the-viewpoint of darth-vader aboard the-tantive-iv.
development ==
in 2003, traveller's-tales started the-work on the-game with assistance from lego-interactive, who would also publish the-game.
after the-lego-group left the-gaming-industry and closed down lego-interactive in 2004, a-small-team of former lego-interactive employees went on to found a-small-team of former lego-interactive employees own publishing-company, giant-interactive-entertainment, and would be able to publish all-future-lego-titles, including lego-star-wars: the-video-game.
after the-huge-success of the-game, traveller's-tales downright bought giant, and renamed traveller's-tales to tt-games-publishing.
reception and legacy ==
lego-star-wars received generally-positive-reviews.
the-pc-version received a-score of 77/100 from metacritic and the-game maintained a-consistently-high-position at the-top of the-uk-charts in may 2005.lego
star-wars was the-thirteenth-best-selling-game of 2005.
figures released by the-npd-group show the-playstation-2-version as the-tenth-best-selling-single-platform-title of 2005.
the-game's-worldwide-sales-total exceeded 3.3-million-copies in march 2006 and 6.7 million in may 2009.
in the-united-states, the-game's-game-boy-advance-version alone sold 580,000-copies and earned $17 million by august 2006.
during the-period between january 2000 and august 2006, it was the-49th-highest-selling-game launched for the-game-boy-advance, nintendo-ds or playstation-portable in that-country.
the-playstation-2-version of lego-star-wars:
the-video-game received a-"double-platinum"-sales-award from the-entertainment-and-leisure-software-publishers-association (elspa), indicating sales of at-least-600,000-copies in the-united-kingdom.
by july 2006, the-playstation-2-version of lego-star-wars had sold 1-million-copies and earned $34 million in the-united-states alone.
next-generation ranked the-playstation-2-version of lego-star-wars as the-54th-highest-selling-game launched for the-playstation 2, xbox or gamecube between january 2000 and july 2006 in that-country.
it was one of the-best-selling-ps2-games with more-than-four-fifths of the-copies sold on the-playstation 2.
ign rated the-game 8 out of 10 saying, "if you're a-parent, lego star wars:
the-video-game should be at the-top of your-child's-birthday-list.
the-video-game has everything a-family-oriented-title needs: the-video-game has personality, puzzles, cooperative-modes, replay-value, low-violence, a-lack of frustrating-difficulty, and most importantly, the-video-game has darth-vader.
and that's what makes it enjoyable for adults too, because let's face it; darth-vader makes everything better -- it's a-fact."
the-game's-sequel, lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy, was released in september 2006, while a-compilation, lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga, was released in november 2007 and lego-star-wars iii:
the-clone-wars was released in march 2011.
lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, based on the-2015-film of the-same-name, was released in june 2016, and lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga, which will depict all-nine-films in the-skywalker-saga, including the three featured in lego-star-wars: the-video-game, will be released in 2021.
references == ==
external-links ==
lego-star-wars:
the-video-game at mobygames below is a-list of actors and actresses that are part of the-voice-cast of the-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars and the-video-game at
mobygames below corresponding-film.
the-show's-main-voice-actors have included: matt-lanter, james-arnold-taylor, ashley-eckstein, dee-bradley-baker, catherine-taber, tom-kane, anthony-daniels, ben-burtt, ian-abercrombie, corey-burton, terrence-c.-carson, nika-futterman, and matthew-wood.
actors from the-live-action-films who returned to reprise their-roles for the-show include: wood as the-b1-battle-droids and general-grievous, ahmed-best as jar-jar-binks (although binks was voiced by phil-lamarr in three-early-episodes), daniels as c-3po, burtt as r2-d2, chewbacca, and darth-vader's-breaths, daniel-logan as the-young-clone-trooper-cadets and boba-fett, liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn, and pernilla-august as shmi-skywalker, respectively.
additionally, samuel-l.-jackson and christopher-lee reprised the-roles of mace-windu and count-dooku in the-animated-film, respectively, but not in the-television-series.
actors who appear by original-recordings from revenge of the-sith to represent their-characters in the-final-season-episode "shattered" include: hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, jackson as mace-windu and ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine.
the-characters of ahsoka and darth-maul appear by motion-capture of lauren-mary-kim and ray-park—who reprises his-role from the-phantom-menace—in the-episode "the-phantom-apprentice", whilst eckstein and sam-witwer retain the-voice-talent.
cast == ==
see also ==
list of star-wars cast members ==
references ==
external-links ==
full-cast and crew of star-wars:
the-clone-wars at the-internet-movie-database-star-wars:
the-old-republic is a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game (mmorpg) based in the-star-wars-universe.
developed by bioware-austin and a-supplemental-team at bioware-edmonton, a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game (mmorpg) based in the-star-wars-universe was announced on october 21, 2008.
a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game (mmorpg) based in the-star-wars-universe was released for the-microsoft-windows-platform on december 20, 2011 in north-america and part of europe.
this-story takes place in the-star-wars-universe shortly after the-establishment of a-tenuous-peace between the-re-emergent-sith-empire and the-galactic-republic.
a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game (mmorpg) based in the-star-wars-universe features eight-different-classes.
each of the-eight-classes has a-three-act-storyline that progresses as the character levels up.
players join either-the-republic or the-sith, but players may possess a-morality at any-point along the-light/dark-spectrum.
different-classes favor different-styles of gameplay, and the-game features extensive-customization-options, fully voiced dialogue, companion-characters, and dialogue-options similar to bioware's-other-role-playing-games.
although not officially disclosed, based on estimates, it is one of the-most-developmentally-expensive-games made.
the-game had one-million-subscribers within three-days of the-game launch, making the-game the world's "fastest-growing mmo ever", however, in the-following-months the-game lost a-fair-share of the-game subscriptions, but has remained profitable.
the-game has since adopted the hybrid free-to-play business model with remaining-subscription-option.
the-game was met with positive-reception upon release and has received several-updates and expansion-packs.
several-books and comics based on  the-game have been released.
the-game is estimated that  the-game made $139 million in additional-revenues on top of the-subscription-income in 2013.
in an-earnings-call to investors in october 2019, electronic-arts announced that star wars:
the-old-republic was closing in on a-billion-dollars in lifetime-revenue, making  the-old-republic a huge financial success based on the-reported-$200-million-development-budget.
this-story takes place in the-star-wars--fictional-universe shortly after the-establishment of a-tenuous-peace between the-re-emergent-sith-empire and the-galactic-republic, 300 years after the-events of the-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-games, and more than 3,600 years before the-events in the-star-wars films.
the-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic are held responsible for the-success of the-sith during the-devastating-28-year-long-great-galactic-war (which led to the-treaty of coruscant prior to the-"cold-war"), and thus choose to relocate from coruscant to tython, where the-jedi-order had initially been founded, to seek guidance from the-force.
the-sith-control-korriban, where they have re-established a-sith-academy.
the-game's-"return"-cinematic-trailer depicts the-events where korriban is re-conquered by the-sith.
during the-events where korriban is re-conquered by the-sith, a-smuggler named nico okarr is being led to a-smuggler named nico okarr prison cell in a-jail orbiting korriban by a-jedi, satele-shan, and her-master, kao-cen-darach.
suddenly, a-sith named darth malgus, and his-master vindican, along with several-sith-troops, attack the-base.
satele, a-trooper named jace malcom, and okarr escape the-attack, but darach is cut down by malgus.
malgus then kills vindican, who was wounded by darach.
10 years later, new-conflicts have arisen.
in the-"hope"-cinematic-trailer, satele and some-troops destroy a-sith-party that includes malgus.
malcom, who has become the-troop's-commander, states that, despite the-losses, there is still hope amongst even-"a-single-spark of courage".
later in the-"deceived"-cinematic-trailer, however, malgus, having appeared to survive the-earlier-attack albeit with a-mask covering malgus nose and mouth, leads an-army of sith into the-jedi-temple on coruscant, killing many-jedi including the-jedi-master-ven-zallow and corivri-shan.
after the-death of jedi-grand-master-zym, master-satele-shan is named the new jedi grand master.
the-game itself is set in the-cold-war soon after these-events, with the-jedi-order and galactic-republic struggling to maintain the-jedi-order and galactic-republic control of the-core-worlds while the sith plot the-jedi-order and galactic-republic downfall and the-expansion of the-sith-empire.
the-conflict opens on many-fronts and across many-planets, while native-factions are engaged in political-struggles or civil-war.
bioware stated, prior to release, that the-game itself would have a-significant-focus on the-storyline.
each of the-eight-classes has a-three-act-storyline that progresses as the character levels up.
a-collaborative-effort between bioware, lucasarts, ea-games and dark-horse-comics has resulted in webcomics entitled star wars:
the-old-republic –-threat of peace and star-wars:
the-old-republic – blood of the-empire
, the-purpose of which is to establish the-backstory as the-game opens and closes.
gameplay ==
players join as members of either of the-two-main-factions – the-galactic-republic and the-sith-empire.
although each-faction is led by a-benevolent-or-malevolent-leader, it is emphasized that an-individual-member may possess a-morality at any-point along the-light/dark-spectrum.
the-project's-key-focus is to differentiate between the-player's-faction and morality.
for instance, a-member with ties to the-galactic-republic may belong to the-dark-side while attempting to achieve the-dark-side own ends, which may be misaligned or dissimilar from the-galactic-republic's vision.
player-advancement occurs by a-combination of mission-completion, exploration, and defeating enemies.
new-skills, unlocked by level, are taught by trainers and can be learned in game at a-multitude of locations.
heroic-missions exist that require the-cooperation of multiple-players to complete objectives, and can be repeated normally on a-daily-basis.
while each-class in the-old-republic favors a-certain-play-style (ranged/melee-damage, healing or support skills, or tanking), customization combined with companion-characters allow for a-class to be able to tackle many-different-situations, with or without the-support of other-player-characters, and without requiring specific-other-classes in order to move forward.
players'-choices permanently open or close storylines and affect players'-non-player-character (npc)-companions.
it is intended that the-game should provide more-context for characters'-missions than any-previous-mmorpg.
every-character in the-game, including the-player-character, features full-voice-dialog to enhance gameplay, and interactions feature a-dialogue-system similar to that used in the-mass-effect-series.
players are able to choose from a-variety of npcs, although spending time with a-single-companion will help more in developing-story and content than dividing time among several, and may even develop a-love-interest.
it is possible for players to "blow it big time" if players fail to meet npcs'-expectations.
players also have access to several-planets, including korriban, ord-mantell, nal-hutta, tython, coruscant, balmorra, alderaan, tatooine, dromund-kaas, taris, belsavis, voss, hoth, corellia, ilum and quesh, and the-moon-nar-shaddaa.
the-planet-makeb was added in patch 2.0, along with the-rise of the-hutt-cartel-expansion-pack.
every-player receives their-own-starship, which was announced at electronic-entertainment-expo 2010.
footage of space-combat was released at gamescom.
the-short-clip provided by bioware revealed that space-combat would be a-"tunnel-shooter".
a-tunnel-shooter, otherwise known as a-scrolling-shooter-or-rail-shooter, is a-flying-game where the-player is on a-predetermined-track.
game-play includes moving right and left on the-x-axis and up and down on the-y-axis; however, players do not have control of the-speed of players-space-craft.
jake-neri, lucasarts-producer, told pc-gamer in jake-neri, lucasarts-producer october-2010-issue that jake-neri, lucasarts-producer goal was to "capture the-most-cinematic-moments that we can create.
we want players to get in and feel like players're in the-movies.
it's about-highly-cinematic,-controlled-combat-moments ... very-heroic,-action-packed,-exciting,-visceral-and-dangerous-encounters that'll make you pee your-pants.
with the-december-2013-release of the-free-expansion, galactic-starfighter (gsf), players now have a-free-flight-pvp-space-combat-experience, with multiple-ships and roles independent of other-aspects of the-game.
like many-other-mmorpgs, the-game features dungeons and raids in the-form of flashpoints and operations respectively.
species ===
a-range of playable-species are available for the-player to choose from, some limited to some-factions.
some can play human, cyborg (human-based), twi'lek or zabrak (whose-appearances are initially different depending on which-side the-character is from).
the-republic-only-races are the-miraluka and mirialan, while the-empire-only-races are the-chiss, rattataki and sith-pureblood.
humans and zabrak can pick any-class available, while the-other-species are restricted to limited-choices of classes by default.
more-playable-species are said to be available in the-future through major-updates and the-legacy-system with the-ability to use other-classes'-abilities through the-legacy-system.
the-cathar were added to the-game during patch 2.1, and is available to all-players who unlock more-playable-species through the-cartel-market.
the-togruta-race was announced in january 2015 as a-new-playable-race to be made available in 2015.
the-release of the-expanded-"legacy"-system in april 2012 allows for species to be able to play all-classes (both-empire and republic) by unlocking that-species with an-infusion of in-game money or by levelling a-character of that-race to level 50.
under the-expanded-"legacy"-system, for example, a-player may choose chiss, which by default can only choose the-non-sith-classes on the-empire-side, as a-new-sith-character.
likewise, a-sith-pureblood, which by default can only choose the-force-powered-classes, could choose to be a-non-force-class.
along the-same-vein, both-species, which are restricted to empire, could even choose the-option of fighting for the-republic, including training as a-jedi.
by the-same-method, unlocking the-zabrak-species allows users to play both-appearances regardless from which side the-character is from.
classes ===
each-faction contains different-classes, each with a-distinct-backstory and a-branching-storyline affected by players'-moral-choices.
classes are exclusive to one-faction or the other.
however, the-classes of one-faction mirror the-classes of the other (for example, jedi-knight and sith-warrior).
eight-classes exist: the-bounty-hunter, sith-warrior, imperial-agent, and sith-inquisitor for the-sith-empire; and the-trooper, smuggler, jedi-knight, and jedi-consular for the-galactic-republic.
although each-class has a-distinct-storyline, each-class are integrated with the-game's-overall-arc.
each-class may also choose from two-advanced-classes, resulting in a-total of 8-advanced-classes per faction.
advanced-classes share the-same-storyline as advanced-classes base class.
lightsaber and blaster-colors are not faction or class restricted, but some are restricted based on level and/or lightside or darkside-alignment.
for example, some-lightsabers can only be bought if light or darkside aligned.
each-class has each-class own starship, which serves as the-player's-base of operations.
bounty-hunters have the-d5-mantis-patrol-craft.
sith-warriors and sith-inquistors have the-fury.
imperial-agents have the-x-70b-phantom.
smugglers have the-xs-freighter.
troopers have the-bt-7-thunderclap.
jedi-knights and jedi-consulars have the-defender.
certain-pieces of these-ships can be upgraded, allowing  certain-pieces of these-ships to perform better in space-combat-missions.
companions ===
the-game features a-passive-form of crafting, known as crew-skills, in which a-player's-companions carry out gathering and crafting tasks asynchronously to the-player's-adventures out in the-world.
each-class gets five-companions via each-class storyline.
the-player can assign up-to-five-companions to perform up-to-3-various-skills.
crafting-skills allow the-player's-companions to create items, and  the-player can reverse engineer many-items to possibly learn to make a-better-version.
the-item is destroyed in the-process, but  the-player gets some of the-materials back.
gathering-skills allow the player or gathering-skills companions to gather resources out in the-world.
mission-skills allow the-player's-companions to perform acts on the-player's-behalf, gaining the-player-light or darkside-influence and other-rewards, such as medical-items or companion-gifts.
during e3 2011, a-video was shown with gameplay-footage of the-bounty-hunter, along with a-jawa-companion named blizz.
the-developers stated during the-chat that only-the-bounty-hunter would be able to get blizz and that other-classes would have unique-companions as well, including some-companions that are force-users.
it was also shown that companions would have a-similar-character-screen as the-players and can have gear just like a-player-character.
bioware announced same-sex-romance-options with companions or other-npcs before release.
the-options were implemented for some-non-companions in rise of the-hutt-cartel, and expanded with shadow of revan.
options for some-new-companions were implemented in knights of the-fallen-empire, and expanded for some-new-and-original-companions with knights of the-eternal-empire up to marriage.
during patch 1.5, hk-51 was added for all-classes on both-empire-and-republic-factions.
hk-51 was the-first-companion added to every-classes, and can be obtained through a-questline.
hk-51 is an-assassin-droid based on the popular hk-47 from the-original-knights of the-old-republic-series.
a-female-ewok-companion, treek, was implemented in patch 2.3 and is available to all-classes.
this-companion requires either-a-purchase from the-cartel-market or a-1,000,000-credit-fee along with a-legacy-level of 40.
subscription ===
the-old-republic required a-monthly-subscription to play, following a-month of play included with the-initial-purchase.
options are available to pay for one-month, two month, three month, or six month blocks, with discounted-rates for multiple-month-blocks.
payment is by credit-card or time-card.
the free-to-play version integrates most of the-primary-features in the-game, but has several-restrictions, such as credit-limits and reduced-leveling-speed.
after launch, the-game's-subscribers rose to 1.7 million by february 2012.
by may 2012, those-numbers fell to 1.3 million.
by july 2012, the-subscriber-base fell below 1 million, prompting ea to convert the-game to free-to-play.
ea stated that 500,000-subscribers were needed to make the-game profitable saying that 500,000-subscribers were "well above"
that number, by may 2013, subscriptions had fallen below 500,000 but at the-time, stabilized there.
on november 15, 2012, the free-to-play option went live on all-servers.
as of august 2014 the-game has over-one-million-monthly-players.
development ==
the-old-republic is bioware's-first-entry into the-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game (mmorpg)-market, and is the-third-star-wars-mmorpg after star-wars-galaxies, which was shut down in december 2011, the-same-month-swtor was released and clone-wars-adventures, which was shut down in march 2014.
the-development saw the-entirety of bioware-austin working on the-game.
bioware had long been interested in working on a-mmorpg, but waited until bioware had "the-right-partners, the-right-team, and the-right-i.p."-a-major-focus in the-game is on developing characters'-individual-stories and, in october 2008, bioware considered the-game to have more-story-content than all of bioware other games combined.
the-writing-team worked on the-project longer than any of the-game's-other-development-teams.
an-october-2008-preview noted some of the-12-full-time-writers had been working on the-old-republic for more-than-two-years at that-point.
although bioware has not disclosed development-costs, industry-leaders and financial-analysts have estimated bioware to be between $150 million and $200 million or more, making bioware, at the-time, the-most-expensive-video-game made, though if marketing-costs are included, bioware is eclipsed by grand-theft-auto-v, with an-estimated-cost of $265 million.
the-game had 1-million-subscribers within three-days of the-game launch, making the-game the world's "fastest-growing mmo ever".
however, in the-following-months the-game lost a-fair-share of the-game subscriptions, but has remained profitable.
the-game has since adopted the hybrid free-to-play business model with remaining-subscription-option.
it is estimated that the-game made $139 million in additional-revenues, in addition to the-subscription-income, in 2013.the-game's-first-cinematic-trailer, "deceived", was shown at the-electronic-arts-2009-e3-press-conference on june 1, 2009.
a-public-live-demo was shown for the-first-time at the-gamescom.
on september 29, 2009, bioware announced that bioware would be accepting applications for testers from the-game-community.
within minutes, the-official-website was down due to traffic, and bioware announced shortly after that the-site was being changed in order to accommodate the-increase in visitors.
a-second-cinematic-trailer,-"hope", was released on june 14, 2010, that depicts another-battle that happened before the-game, the-battle of alderaan.
on june 6, a-new-trailer-"return" was released at e3 2011 depicting the-initial-sith-invasion-force as the-initial-sith-invasion-force retakes the-initial-sith-invasion-force home-world of korriban.
game-testing was officially announced to be underway on july 9, 2010, for testers from north-american-territories.
although released in most-regions of the-world, ea have said australasia will be getting the-game at a-later-date.
the-reason behind this is to hold back digital-and-boxed-copies for a-smooth-launch so to avoid any-problems encountered during launch.
however, bioware revealed that the-game would not be region or ip blocked, allowing players to purchase the-game from other-regions.
additionally, bioware allowed australian-and-new-zealand-players to take part in the-beta-stages of the-game.
bioware-community-manager-allison-berryman said "data from this-test will be used to inform decisions about the-launch of the-game in oceanic-regions", however, bioware-community-manager-allison-berryman was unable to provide any-information in regards to the-game's launch in oceanic-regions.
on october 11, 2011, bioware announced that star-wars: the-old-republic would be released globally on december 20, 2011.
however, this-'global'-launch only included north-america and a-part of europe, as the-launch-date had delayed for the-asia-and-oceanic-regions.
on december 21, 2011, bioware announced that an-australian-and-new-zealand-release-date had been set for march 1, 2012.
early-access to the-game was granted one week before release, on december 13, 2011, for those who had pre-ordered the-game online; access opened in "waves" based on pre-order-date.
on january 18, 2012, the-first-content-patch (1.1) was released, adding a-new-flashpoint and adding four-bosses to an-existing-operation.
patch (1.2) was released on april 12, 2012.
the-update included the-new-legacy-system, a-new-flashpoint,-operation, a-pvp-warzone, as well as improved-character-textures and advanced-options such as user-interface-customization.
guild-banks and player-character-pets are also introduced.
a-weekend-pass-free-trial was made available for new-players but has since closed.
patch 1.3 was released in june 2012.
the-game-update featured a-new-group-finder, the-ability to augment every-item, and adaptable-social-gear.
in addition, players will be able to request that players-characters are able to transfer to other-servers.
subsequent-patches have introduced a-'cartel-market' where players can purchase virtual-currency to spend on cosmetic-items in-game.
these-items include armour-sets, lightsaber-colour-crystals, mounts, pets and character-perk unlocks.
in january 2012, star-wars: the-old-republic was officially recognized by guinness-world-records as the-"largest-entertainment-voice over project ever", with over-200,000-lines of recorded-dialogue.
this-feat is recorded in the-guinness-world-records-gamer's-edition-book.
on april 26, 2012, bioware announced that the-game was available in the-middle-east and remaining european countries who were excluded from the-original-launch.
on july 21, 2020, the-game became available on steam.
expansion-packs === ====
rise of the-hutt-cartel ====
in october 2012, bioware announced the-old-republic's-first-digital-expansion-pack, rise of the-hutt-cartel.
the-expansion is centered on the-rising-threat of the-hutt-cartel, which has arisen to challenge the-galactic-republic and the-sith-empire for control of the-galaxy.
the-battle with the-hutts is centered on the-planet-makeb, which hides a-"powerful-secret".
much like the-main-game, the-campaign on makeb is fully voiced.
the-level-cap was raised to 55, with the-leveling from 50 onwards centered on makeb.
rise of the-hutt-cartel was released on april 14, 2013.
those who pre-ordered the-expansion prior to january 7, 2013, were allowed early-access on april 9.
in late-september, rise of the-hutt-cartel became free after subscribing to the-game.
galactic starfighter ===
in october 2013, bioware announced bioware next-expansion, which unlike bioware predecessor rise of the-hutt-cartel did not include any-story-content, however, galactic-starfighter introduced 12v12-space-based-pvp-combat on two-maps, with 2 'capture-the-flag' combat missions.
three-stock-starfighters were made available - a scout, a strike fighter, and a gunship.
more are accessible for cartel-coins.
subscribers began subscribers early-access on december 3, 2013, with full-subscriber-awards if subscribers maintained an-active-subscription on november 1.
preferred-access"-players, those who do not have an-active-subscription but have purchased items via the-cartel-market, received " preferred-access"-players, those who do not have an-active-subscription but have purchased items via the-cartel-market early-access on january 14, 2014, with some-rewards.
full-access to all-players with an-account opened on february 4, 2014.
a-new-'deathmatch'-game-style was added with the-update, as well as a-new-starfighter-class, the-bomber.
galactic-strongholds ===
in january 2014, bioware revealed plans for 2014 including two-expansion-packs, with one similar to galactic-starfighter in scope and one more closely resembling rise of the-hutt-cartel.
the first is entitled galactic strongholds, introducing player-housing and flagships for guilds.
subscribers received early-access august 19, 2014, as well as access to the-exclusive-"nar-shaddaa-sky-palace"; preferred-access-players received early-access starting in september.
full-access to all-players with an-account opened in october.
shadow of revan ====
on october 6, bioware announced the-second-planned-expansion, entitled shadow of revan.
the-second-planned-expansion, entitled shadow of revan is centered on the-order of revan, formerly-a-fringe-group that appeared early in imperial-missions, now-a-great-army seeking to establish a-new-galactic-order, led by the reborn revan himself.
the-campaign raised the-level-cap to 60, and takes place on two-new-worlds: rishi, a-tropical-pirate-haven on the-edge of the-galaxy, and yavin 4 (which first appeared in the-original-star-wars-film), home of an-ancient-sith-warrior-sect called the massassi.
shadow of revan was available for preorder.
players who preordered before november 2, 2014, received an-experience-boost that granted twelve-times-multiplicative-experience for class-related-missions, seven days of early-access, a grand statue of revan for placement in strongholds, and a free edition of rise of the-hutt-cartel (to give to another-player).
the-expansion was released on december 9, 2014.
knights of the-fallen-empire ===
in june 2015, the-third-expansion for the-game, titled knights of the-fallen-empire, was announced at ea's-e3-2015-press-conference.
knights of the-fallen-empire features a-renewed-focus on cinematic-storytelling, as well as new-planets, new-companions, a-dynamic-story affected by player-choices and a-level-cap of 65.
a-cinematic-trailer, titled "sacrifice", was released along with the-initial-announcement.
the-trailer, made by blur-studio, received critical-acclaim, and was awarded the "best trailer of e3" award by ign.
the-first-nine-chapters of knights of the-fallen-empire were launched on october 27, 2015, with additional-chapters starting in early 2016.
subscribers received one-level-60-character-token.
after the-release of knights of the-fallen-empire, rise of the-hutt-cartel and shadow of revan became free for those subscribing to the-game, and access remains on the-account if a-subscription is canceled.
the-release of knights of the-fallen-empire depicts the-story of "the-outlander" - the-player-character.
the-expansion introduced new-companion-characters available to all-classes.
one-feature introduced with the-expansion was the-alliance-system.
the-alliance-system entails recruiting-allies, including some-companions from other-classes that formerly were restricted, from across the-galaxy to join the-fight against the-eternal-empire.
players were given the-ability to strengthen players rebellion by providing resources to "specialists" that oversee four-areas of operation: technology, underworld-trade, military and force-usage.
most of the-early-game-content was heavily streamlined, allowing players to level up a-character by completing solely-story and class-specific-missions if class-specific-missions so choose.
a-solo-mode was also introduced for story-critical-flashpoints.
the-new-storyline, featuring primarily-solo-content, has 13-chapters.
knights of the-eternal-throne ====
in december 2016, knights of the-eternal-throne was released as the-fourth-expansion and sixth-major-update that coincided with the-game's-five-year-anniversary.
it continued the-story of the-outlander.
subscribers received one-level-65-character-token, with additional-tokens available at the-cartel-store.
the-storyline has nine-chapters of solo-content and the-storyline raised the-level-cap to 70.
the-expansion focused on defeating empress-vaylin and the-eternal-empire.
during the-expansion, developers released several-key-updates and patches that continued the-story and added new-activities for players to engage in.
onslaught ====
in april 2019, it was announced on the-official-site that the-next-expansion, onslaught, would be released in september 2019.
the-next-expansion was to follow the-new-story that was begun with jedi under siege.
in august, it was announced that the-release-date for onslaught had been moved back from september 2019 to october 22, 2019.
onslaught-release-timeline (nearly-three-years) was the-largest-gap between expansions and major-game-updates which typically occur annually.
this-expansion raised the-level-cap to 75.
other-media ==
chronicle-books released the-art and making of star-wars: the-old-republic in november 2011, which chronicles the-creation of the-game and includes concept-artwork and interviews from the-development-team.
chronicle-books was written by former-star-wars-insider-editor-frank-parisi and bioware-writing-director-daniel-erickson.
chronicle-books includes a-foreword by penny-arcade's-mike-"gabe"-krahulik.
leading up to game's-release on december 20, bioware released music-tracks from the-game each day which were not included with the-soundtrack which came with the-collector's-edition of the-game.
the-first-track released was titled "the mandalorian blockade".
razer released several-peripherals based on the-game to coincide with the-launch-date.
several-peripherals based on the-game included custom made keyboards, mice, gaming-headsets and mouse-pads.
in august 2012, lego announced plans to release two-sets based on the-game, the-sith-fury-class-interceptor and the-striker-class-starfighter.
at star-wars-celebration in 2019, kathleen-kennedy revealed that lucasfilm was in the-tentative-stages of developing an-adaptation of knights of the-old-republic.
in may 2019, buzzfeed reported that laeta-kalogridis was writing the-first-movie in a-trilogy based on the-game.
comics ===
an-internet-comic produced by dark-horse and written by the-old-republic-developer-rob-chestney offers backstory to the-game.
the-story spans ten years from the-signing of the-treaty of coruscant to the-events that start the-game.
the-comic,-titled-threat of peace, was released bi-monthly, and reached its-conclusion in march 2010.
a-second-internet-comic titled blood of the-empire has been released and follows the-story of a-sith-apprentice on a-dangerous-secret-mission.
the-story of a-sith-apprentice on a-dangerous-secret-mission is produced by dark-horse and written by bioware's-senior-writer alexander-freed.
the-story of a-sith-apprentice on a-dangerous-secret-mission is set 25 years before the-treaty of coruscant, and offers readers a-new-perspective of the-events leading up to the-start of the-old-republic.
a-sneak-preview of the-art was released, followed by the-first-issue on april 23, 2010.
novels ===
a-256-page-novel called deceived was released by del-rey on march 22, 2011.
this-story, by paul-s.-kemp, tells of darth-malgus, the-sith-lord responsible for the-sacking of coruscant.
another-novel written by sean-williams called star wars: the old republic:
fatal-alliance was published on july 21, 2010.
drew-karpyshyn wrote a-novel titled revan, published on november 15, 2011.
drew-karpyshyn features revan, revealing revan fate after the-knights of the-old-republic-games.
karpyshyn wrote another-novel, the-old-republic:
annihilation, that was released on november 13, 2012.
==-reception ==
star-wars:
the-old-republic has received generally-positive-reviews from critics, with a-score of 85 on metacritic and an-84% on gamerankings.
g4tv gave a-review of 5/5 and praised the-game for "top-notch-music and voice acting" and "hundreds of hours of content".
pc-gamer gave a 93/100, praising the-story, voice-acting, and the-amount of content available.
gamespy gave a-review of 4/5, praising the-story-lines and companion-system but criticising the-"standard-kill and fetch"-quests.
gamespot gave the-game 8.0/10, saying "[the-old-republic] isn't the-next-step in online-role-playing-games.
instead, it's a-highly-entertaining-refinement of what has come before it."
gamesradar gave the-game 8/10 calling it "an extremely satisfying experience that sets the-stage for a-bright-future".
the-game has received a-9.0/10-"amazing"-rating from ign.com.
during star-wars: the old republic's launch week, long-queue-times were seen on some-servers, with bioware increasing population-caps and adding more-servers to attempt to resolve population-caps.
some-pre-order-users discovered some-pre-order-users had invalid-registration-codes.
after release, at-least-one-reviewer was less favorable as eurogamer lowered their-rating to a 4/10 from a-4/10-initial-high-score.
msnbc awarded star-wars: the-old-republic as game of the-year.
in 2012, the-ablegamers-foundation awarded star-wars: the-old-republic as the-ablegamers-foundation mainstream game for 2011 for being able to accommodate gamers with special-needs.
it praised the-game's-features which included many-accessibility-options, including full-subtitles, queue-able-actions, multiple-action-bars, area-looting, auto-looting, and built-in-mouse-sensitivity.
portrayal of vette ===
one-character, a-slave-companion for the-sith-warrior named vette, drew controversy.
writing for kotaku, mike fahey, after playing the-game, recalled players boasting of their-torturing of vette-and-vette-low-affection-rating for their.
the-daily-mail cited fahey's-article as a-source and published a-story the following day alleging that the-option to treat vette decently was not popular or encouraged; the-paper was criticized for the-paper lack of evidence for the-paper statements and the-paper selective information, religion-dispatches researched the-matter, surveying 369-players to ask religion-dispatches how religion-dispatches acted.
the-survey's-findings suggested that most-players chose the-good-options and felt uncomfortable doing any-evil-ones.
most-players suggested that the-presence of characters like vette influenced the-player's-actions, making most-players want to take choices that would gain affection.
references ==
external-links ==
official-website
this is a-list of star-wars-video-games.
though there have been many-hobbyist-made-and-freeware-games based on the-star-wars-movie-series and brand, this-page lists only-the-games that have been developed or published by lucasarts, or officially licensed by lucasfilm.
platforms: arcade, apple-ii, atari 2600, famicom, nintendo-entertainment-system, super nintendo-entertainment-system, nintendo 64, sega-master-system, sega-dreamcast, game-gear, gamecube, dos, microsoft-windows, macintosh, classic-mac-os, macos, playstation, playstation 2, playstation 3, playstation 4, playstation vita, xbox, xbox 360, xbox one, wii, wii u, game boy, game boy color, game boy advance, nintendo ds, playstation portable, ios, android, linux, stadia.
episode-related-titles ==
the-following is a-list of star-wars-games that are based on the-feature-films.
the-feature-films are listed in order of release by film.
episode iv:
a-new-hope ===
star-wars (1983–88) – arcade
re-released for: atari 2600, atari 5200, commodore 64, atari 8-bit family, colecovision, bbc-micro, zx-spectrum, acorn-electron, amstrad-cpc, atari st, apple-ii, dos, macintosh, amiga.
star-wars (1987) –
famicom-star-wars:
attack on the-death-star (1991) –-pc-9801, x68000
star-wars (1991–93) – nes, game-boy, master-system, game-gear
super-star-wars (1992) –
snes re-released for: wii-virtual-console, playstation 4, playstation vita star wars arcade (1993) –
arcade re-released for: 32x
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1982) –
atari 2600,
intellivision-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1985/88)
re-released for: bbc-micro, commodore 64, zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc, amiga, atari-st.
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1992) –
game-boy-super-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1993) –
snes re-released for:-wii-virtual-console ===
episode-vi:
return of the-jedi ===
star-wars:
return of the-jedi –-death-star-battle (1983/84) –
atari 2600, atari 8-bit family, atari 5200, zx-spectrum
star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1984/88) –
arcade,-bbc-micro, commodore 64, zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc, amiga, atari-st, gamecube-super-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1994) – snes, game-boy, game-gear
re-released for:-wii-virtual-console == =
i: the-phantom-menace ===
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) – microsoft-windows,
playstation-star-wars episode i (1999) –
pinball-star-wars
i: racer (1999) –
windows, mac, dreamcast, nintendo 64,
game-boy-color
re-released for:-nintendo-switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020), xbox one (2020)
star-wars: racer-arcade (2000) –
arcade-star-wars
i: jedi-power-battles (2000) – playstation, dreamcast, game-boy-advance-star-wars
i: battle for naboo (2000) – nintendo 64, microsoft-windows-star-wars-episode
obi-wan's-adventures (2000) –
game-boy-color-star-wars: starfighter (2001) –
windows, playstation 2, xbox, arcade
star-wars:
starfighter-special-edition (2001)
xbox-star-wars: starfighter (2003)
star-wars: obi-wan (2001) – xbox ===
episode-ii:
attack of the-clones ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2002) – gamecube, playstation 2, xbox-star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) – game-boy advance
star-wars: the-new-droid-army (2002) –
game-boy-advance ===
episode iii: revenge of the-sith ===
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005) – playstation 2, xbox, nintendo-ds, game-boy-advance , mobile-phone ==
series-titles ==
the-following is a-list of star-wars-games that are not based on a-particular-feature-film, and form part of a-series.
a-list of star-wars-games that are not based on a-particular-feature-film, and form part of a-series is ordered from the-oldest-series to the latest.
===-x-wing-==
star-wars: x-wing (1993) – dos, macintosh expansion(s):
imperial-pursuit (1993) and b-wing-(1993)-compilation: x-wing-(collector's-cd-rom) (1994)
star-wars: tie-fighter (1994) – dos, macintosh expansion(s):
defender of the-empire (1994) compilation:
tie-fighter (collector's-cd-rom) (1995)
star-wars: x-wing vs. tie-fighter (1997) –
windows-expansions:
balance of power-campaigns (1997), and flight-school (1998)
star-wars: x-wing-alliance (1999)
rebel-assault ===
star-wars: rebel-assault (1993)-dos, mac, sega-cd, 3do star-wars: rebel-assault ii:
the-hidden-empire (1995)-dos, playstation,
microsoft-windows ===
jedi-knight ===
star-wars:
dark-forces (1995)-dos, mac, playstation
star-wars-jedi-knight:
dark-forces ii
windows expansion(s)
:-star-wars-jedi-knight: mysteries of the-sith (1998)
windows-star-wars-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast (2002)
windows, mac, xbox, gamecube re-released for:-nintendo-switch (2019), playstation 4 (2019)
star-wars-jedi-knight:
jedi-academy (2003)
windows, mac, xbox
re-released for:-nintendo-switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020) ===
rogue-squadron ===
star-wars: rogue-squadron (1998)
windows, nintendo 64
star-wars-rogue-squadron-ii:
rogue-leader (2001)
gamecube star wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike (2003)
star-wars-racer ===
i: racer (1999)
– windows, mac, dreamcast, nintendo 64, game-boy-color re-released for: nintendo switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020)
star-wars: racer-arcade (2000) –
arcade-star-wars-racer-revenge (2002) –-playstation 2
re-released for:-playstation-store (2015), playstation 4 (2019) ===
galactic-battlegrounds ===
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds (2001) windows, mac
expansion(s):
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds:
clone-campaigns (2002)
windows, mac ===
starfighter ===
star-wars: starfighter (2001)
windows, playstation-2-star-wars:
starfighter-special-edition (2001)
star-wars: starfighter (2003)
arcade-star-wars: jedi-starfighter (2002)
xbox, playstation 2 ===
knights of the-old-republic ===
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic (
2003)-windows, xbox, mac, ios, android-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords (2005)
windows, linux (steamos), xbox, mac , android-star-wars:
the-old-republic (2011)
(mmorpg)-windows expansion(s)
: rise of the-hutt-cartel (2013), galactic-starfighter (2014), galactic-strongholds (2014), shadow of revan (2014), knights of the-fallen-empire (2015), knights of the-eternal-throne (2016), and onslaught (2019) ===
star-wars:
galaxies ===
star-wars-galaxies:
an-empire divided (2003)
windows (shutdown) expansion(s):
star-wars-galaxies:
jump to lightspeed (2004)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
episode-iii-rage of the-wookiees (2005)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
trials of obi-wan (2005),compilation(s):
star-wars-galaxies: starter-kit (2005)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
the-total-experience (2005), and star-wars-galaxies: the-complete-online-adventures (2006) ===
battlefront ===
the-battlefront-series has been handled by two-different-developers.
pandemic-studios-star-wars: battlefront (2004) – playstation 2, windows, xbox, mac, mobile-phone-star-wars: battlefront ii (2005) – playstation 2, windows, xbox, playstation portable star wars battlefront: renegade-squadron (2007) – playstation portable
star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron (2009) – playstation-portable, nintendo-ds-star-wars-battlefront: mobile-squadrons (2009) –
mobile-phoneea-dice-star-wars-battlefront (2015) – playstation 4, windows, xbox one
star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017) – playstation 4, windows, xbox one ===
empire at war ===
star-wars: empire at war (2006
) windows, mac-os-x-expansion(s):
star-wars: empire at war: forces of corruption  (2006
)-windowscompilation:
star-wars: empire at war: gold-pack (game and expansion package)
(2007)-windows ===
the-force unleashed ===
star-wars:
the-force unleashed
(2008)-windows, mac-os, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation 2, playstation portable, wii, nintendo-ds,
ios-star-wars:
the-force-unleashed-–-ultimate-sith-edition (
2009) windows, mac-os, xbox 360, playstation 3 star wars:
the-force unleashed ii
windows, wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, ios
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-animated-series ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels (2008) –-wii
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance (2008) –
nintendo-ds-star-wars:
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes (2009) –
windows, playstation 2, nintendo-ds, playstation portable, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii
clone-wars-adventures (2010) –
windows, mac-(shutdown) ==
stand-alone-titles ==
the-following is a-list of stand-alone-star-wars-games that do not form part of a-series, released primarily for consoles, personal-computers, handhelds and arcade.
the-titles are grouped together depending on the-decade in which the-titles were released.
===-1980s ===
star-wars: jedi-arena (1983) –
atari 2600
star-wars: droids (1988) –
amstrad-cpc, zx spectrum ===
star-wars: shadows of the-empire (1996) – nintendo 64, windows star-wars: masters of teräs-käsi (1997) –
playstation-star-wars: yoda-stories (1997) –
windows re-released for: game-boy-color (1999)
star-wars: rebellion (star-wars:
supremacy – uk) (1998) –
windows-star-wars-trilogy-arcade (1998) –
arcade-star-wars
millennium-falcon-cd-rom-playset (1998) –
windows === 2000s ===
star-wars: force-commander (2000) –-windows
star-wars: demolition (2000) – playstation, dreamcast star-wars:
super-bombad-racing (2001) –
playstation-2-star-wars: bounty-hunter (2002) – gamecube, playstation 2 re-released for: playstation 3 (2015), playstation 4 (2019)
star-wars: flight of the-falcon (2003) –
advance-star-wars-trilogy:
apprentice of the-force (2004) –
game-boy-advance-star-wars: republic-commando (2005) – xbox,-windows
star-wars: lethal-alliance (2006) – playstation-portable, nintendo ds star-wars: the best of pc (2006) – windows ===
star-wars-battle-pod (2014) –
arcade-star-wars: card-trader (2015) –  card-trading-vader-immortal (2019) – oculus-rift, oculus-quest, playstation-vr
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order (2019) –
windows, playstation 4, xbox-one, stadia ===
star-wars: squadrons (2020) – windows, playstation 4, xbox one
star-wars:
tales from the-galaxy's-edge (2020) – oculus quest ==
games by genre ==
the-following-games are grouped together because the-following-games share the-same-genre, rather than because the-following-games are officially part of the-same-series.
excluded are the-games listed above.
table-games ===
star-wars-chess (1993) – dos, sega-cd, windows-monopoly-star-wars (1997) –-windows
pinball === ====
physical-pinball ====
the-empire strikes back by hankin
(1980)star-wars by data-east (1992)
star-wars-original-trilogy by sega-pinball (1997)
star-wars-episode
i by williams (1999)
star-wars by stern-pinball
the-pin by stern-pinball (2019)
virtual-pinball ====
star-wars-pinball (2013
)-windows, mac, wii-u, xbox 360, 3ds, psvita, playstation 3, playstation 4, kindle-fire, android, ios-star-wars-episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
boba-fettstar-wars-pinball:
balance of the-force (2013)
psvita, playstation 3, playstation 4, android, ios-star-wars-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
darth-vader-star-wars-pinball:
starfighter-assaultstar-wars-pinball:
heroes within (2014)
xbox 360, psvita, ps3, ps4, android, ios-star-wars-pinball: masters of the force star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
droids-star-wars-pinball:
han-solostar-wars-pinball:
star-wars-rebels (2015)  droids-star-wars-pinball:
the-force awakens (2016)
star-wars-pinball:
star-wars: resistance star-wars pinball:
might of the-first-orderstar-wars-pinball: rogue one (2017)
star-wars-pinball:
the-last-jedi (2018)
star-wars-pinball:
ahch-to island-star-wars-pinball:
the-last-jedi---survivestar-wars-pinball:
solo-pack (2018)
star-wars-pinball:
solo-star-wars-pinball:
calrissian-chronicles-star-wars-pinball:
battle of mimbana-twentieth-pinball-table, based on the-first-season of the-mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late-october of 2020 and due for a-spring-2021-release.
kinect-motion-sensor ===
kinect-star-wars (2012)
(kinect)-xbox 360 ===
educational ===
developed by lucas-learning:
star-wars:
yoda's-challenge-star-wars:
the-gungan-frontier-star-wars: droid works (1999) windows, mac
star-wars:
pit-droids-windows, ios-star-wars-math: jabba's-game-galaxy (developed by argonaut-games)
star-wars: jarjar's-journey-adventure-book
star-wars:
anakin's-speedway-star-wars: early-learning-activity-centerother-educational:
star-wars: jedi-math (2008)
(educational)
leapster-star-wars: jedi reading (2008) (educational)
leapster-star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008)
(platform/educational)
didj-star-wars: jedi-trials (2009)
jakks pacific-
plug jakks pacific-
in & play tv-games ===
star-wars: lightsaber-battle-game (2005)
handheld-tv-game
star-wars: revenge of the-sith (2005) –-jakks-pacific-tv
game-star-wars gamekey (expansion)
star-wars:
original-trilogy (2007)
jakks-pacific-tv-game-star-wars: republic-squadron (2009)
jakks-pacific-tv-game ===
non-video-game-pc-software ===
star-wars-screen-entertainment (1994) (screensaver) –
windows-star-wars:
behind the-magic (1998) (cd-rom-encyclopedia) – windows, macintosh
mobile-titles ==
the-following is a-list of star-wars-titles that are only for mobile-operating-systems.
star-wars: battle for the-republic (2005) – mobile phone star-wars: grievous-getaway (2005) – mobile phone
star-wars:
battle above coruscant (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars: republic-commando:
order 66 (2005) – mobile-phone
star-wars: lightsaber-combat (2005) – mobile phone star-wars trivia (2005) –
mobile-phone-star-wars:
ask yoda (2005) – mobile-phone-star-wars: puzzle-blaster (2005) – mobile-phone
star-wars: jedi-assassin (2005) – mobile phone star-wars imperial ace 3d (2006) – mobile phone star-wars cantina (2010) –
ios-star-wars:
trench-run (2009) –
ios-star-wars-battle of hoth (2010) –
ios,-windows-phone-star-wars-arcade: falcon-gunner (2010) –
ios-star-wars: imperial-academy (2011) –
ios-star-wars:
force-collection (2013) –
android, ios-star-wars:
tiny-death-star (2013) –
android, ios, windows-phone-star-wars: assault-team (2014) –
android, ios,-windows-phone-star-wars: commander (2014) – android, ios,-windows-phone-star-wars: galactic-defense (2014) –
android, ios-star-wars journeys: the-phantom-menace (2014) –
ios-star-wars-journeys:
beginnings (2014) –
ios-star-wars: galaxy of heroes (2015) –
android, ios-star-wars: uprising (2015) – android, ios-star-wars:
heroes-path (2015) –
ios-star-wars-rebels:
recon-missions (2015) –
android, ios,-windows-phone
star-wars: card-trader (2015) – android, ios star-wars: force-arena (2017) –
android, ios-star-wars: puzzle-droids (2017) – android, ios-star-wars: jedi challenges (2017) –
android, ios-star-wars:
rise to power (tba) – android ==
browser-games ==
starwars.com
carbon-connection-force-flight-garbage-masher-sharpshooter-clone-training (2008)
live-fire (2008)
clones vs. droids ewok villagedisney.com star wars rebels: ghost-raid – starwars.com, disney.com (2014)
star-wars-rebels: rebel-strike – disney.com (2014) ==
crossovers ==
in some-cases, lucasfilm has allowed other-video-game-franchises to do lucasfilm own star wars games, resulting in crossover-hybrid-franchises.
lego-star-wars ===
lego made video-games based on lego lego wars toys, as part of lego lego video-games franchise.
lego-main-series lego-star-wars: the-video-game (2005):
windows, mac, playstation 2, xbox, gamecube, nintendo ds,
game-boy-advance-lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006):
windows, mac, playstation 2,  xbox, xbox 360, gamecube, nintendo ds, game boy advance, playstation portable
lego-star-wars-iii:
the-clone-wars (2011): playstation 3, xbox 360,  3ds, wii,  windows, mac, nintendo-ds, nintendo, playstation portable lego star wars:
the-force awakens (2016):
windows, playstation 4, playstation 3,  xbox-one, xbox 360, wii u,  mac, nintendo-3ds, playstation vita, ios
lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga (2021):
windows, playstation 4, playstation 5, xbox-one, xbox-series-x, nintendo-switch compilation(s):
lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga (2021) includes lego-star-wars: the-video-game, and lego-star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy.
windows, playstation 3, xbox 360, wii, mac, nintendo-ds, ios, androidmobile-game and web-browser lego-star-wars: the-quest for r2-d2 (2009):
unity-lego-star-wars: ace-assault (2011) –-windows
lego-star-wars: ace-assault 2 (2012) –
windows-lego-star-wars:
battle-orders (2012) –
lego-star-wars:
the-yoda-chronicles (2013) –
android, ios-lego-star-wars:
the-new-yoda-chronicles (2014) –
android, ios-lego-star-wars: microfighters (2014) – android, ios-lego-star-wars: battles (2020) – android, ioslego
indiana-jones-lego-indiana-jones:
the-original-adventures (2008), lucasarts – action-adventure-game featuring unlockable-han-solo and cameos from other-star-wars-characters.
wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation 2, playstation portable, windows-lego-indiana-jones 2:
the-adventure continues (2009), lucasarts – action-adventure-game featuring cameos from star-wars-characters.
wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation portable,
windows ===
angry-birds-star-wars ===
angry-birds-star-wars (2012)
angry-birds-star-wars-ii
(2013) ===
roblox ===
star-wars (2014-2019):
windows, xbox-one, xbox-one s, ios, android, oculus-rift (vr) --sponsors and events for star-wars-rebels, rogue one, the-last-jedi, solo, and the-rise of skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the-events’-respective-games, as well as free-items in the-catalog (currently known as the-avatar-shop) for 1-ticket or for free.
list of sponsors: star wars rebels:
season one (2014)
star-wars-rebels:
season two
(2015)list of events:
universe (2016) - sponsored by rogue one:
a-star-wars-story-space-battle (2017) - sponsored by star-wars:
the-last-jedi-battle-arena (2018) - sponsored by solo: a-star-wars-story-galactic-speedway-creator-challenge (2019) - sponsored by star-wars:
the-rise of skywalkeradditional notes:
besides the-main-events, a-disney-xd-crossover-event known as summer-camp (2015) included a-virtual-prize of the-star-wars: rebels-character, chopper, in the-form of a-tiny-shoulder-pal.
a-disney-xd-crossover-event known as summer-camp (2015) also included promotional-billboards of the-star-wars: rebels-tv-series in the-maps of the-events’-respective-games.
similarly to summer-camp (2015), disney-infinity 3.0 was also featured as a-sponsored-event in 2015, and had the-maps decorated in the-games that were part of the-event that included promotional-billboards that featured the-characters princess-leia, darth-vader, yoda, anakin-skywalker and sabine-wren.
while the-characters princess-leia, darth-vader, yoda, anakin-skywalker and sabine-wren were advertised in billboards in the-events’-respective-games, none of the-actual-virtual-prizes or free-items tied directly into any-star-wars-media.
as part of the-sponsor, star wars rebels:
season two not only included free-items, but was also featured on the-promotional-material of the-billboards in the-maps of two-pre-existing-games on the-platform, and also included the-limited-time-branding on the-games’-respective-thumbnails.
disney infinity ===
the-disney-infinity-series allowed the-use of star-wars-characters alongside characters from other-franchises owned by disney, including characters from the-marvel-and-pixar-films.
disney-infinity 3.0 (2015):
microsoft-windows, playstation 3, playstation 4, xbox 360, xbox one, wii-u, ios, android ===
the sims ===
the-sims 4: journey to batuu (2020): microsoft-windows, mac, playstation 4, xbox-one---ninth-game-pack for the-sims 4.
adds a-new-destination-world called batuu with a-star-wars-style-storyline.
adds new-types of aliens and other-star-wars-inspired-outfits, objects and characters.
minecraft ===
star-wars (2020):
windows, playstation 4, xbox-one, nintendo-switch, amazon-kindle-fire, amazon-fire-tv, ios, android, oculus-rift, gear-vr---dlc for minecraft: bedrock-edition purchasable through the minecraft market place.
adds star-wars-maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the-original-trilogy and the-mandalorian into the-game.
cultural-impact ==
this-category refers to video-games from other-franchises where the-inclusion of star-wars-characters is very minor and restricted only to small-easter-eggs or unlockable-character-cameos.
night-shift (1990) – platform-game featuring action-figures of various-star-wars-characters.
amiga, atari-st, commodore 64, mac, pc, amstrad cpc, zx-spectrum-tony-hawk's-pro-skater-series: tony-hawk's-pro-skater 3 (2001) – skateboarding-game featuring unlockable-darth-maul.
nintendo-gamecube, xbox, playstation 2, pc
tony-hawk's-pro-skater 4 (2002) – skateboarding-game featuring unlockable-jango-fett.
nintendo-gamecube, xbox, playstation 2, pc-secret-weapons over normandy (2003) –
flight-simulation-game featuring unlockable-x-wing-and-tie-fighter.
xbox, playstation 2 , pc
mercenaries: playground of destruction (2005) – features unlockable-character-han-solo.
xbox, playstation 2-soulcalibur-iv (2008) –
fighting-game.
at release featuring darth-vader exclusively in the-playstation-3-version, with yoda exclusively in the-xbox-360-version, and darth-vader's apprentice galen starkiller marek in both-versions.
months after the-release, darth-vader and yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable-content, each at the-version darth-vader and yoda were absent at release.
each of the-star-wars-characters had each of the-star-wars-characters own ending on the-"story-mode".
however, in late 2016, all-dlc in soulcalibur-iv was removed from the-playstation-and-microsoft-stores due to licensing from the-purchase of star-wars by disney.
indiana-jones and the-staff of kings (2009) – action-adventure-game featuring unlockable-han-solo.
wii, playstation 2, nintendo ds,
playstation-portable == canceled games ==
games that were never finished, nor released.
star-wars:
return of the-jedi – ewok-adventure – atari
2600 (unreleased)
star-wars: battlefront-iii (2008) playstation 3, windows, xbox 360 star-wars:
first-assault (2012)
(first-person-shooter)
star-wars 1313 (2013)
(action-adventure)
star-wars-outpost (2013)
star-wars: attack-squadrons (2014)
star-wars: battle of the-sith-lords (2015) (action-adventure)
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-iii (windows, xbox)
star-wars:
the-force-unleashed-iii (windows, wii-u, xbox-one, playstation 4)
project-ragtag (windows, xbox-one, playstation 4) ==
references ==
star-wars-rebels is an-american-3d-animated-science-fiction-television-series produced by lucasfilm-animation and set in the-star-wars-galaxy five years before a-new-hope.
it takes place during the-dark-times, when the-galactic-empire is hunting down the last of the-jedi while a-fledgling-rebellion against the-galactic-empire is emerging.
the-visual-style of the-series is inspired by the-original-star-wars-trilogy concept art by ralph-mcquarrie.
the-series features new-characters, along with some from the-original-trilogy and from the-previous-animated-series, the-clone-wars.
the-series premiered as a-one-hour-television-film, spark of rebellion, on october 3, 2014, on disney-channel prior to the-premiere of the-series on october 13 on disney-xd.
the-second-season premiered on june 20, 2015, with a-one-hour-television-film, the-siege of lothal.
the-third-season premiered on september 24, 2016, with the-television-film, steps into shadow.
the-fourth-and-final-season premiered on october 16, 2017, with another-one-hour-television-film, heroes of mandalore.
the fourth and final season premiered on october 16, 2017, with another-one-hour-television-film, heroes of mandalore-final-episode aired on march 5, filoni served as executive-producers of season one.
greg-weisman left its-final-episode aired on march 5, 2018.dave-filoni, simon-kinberg and greg-weisman after season one.
filoni was also the-supervising-director for the-first-two-seasons, a-role filoni relinquished after accepting a-promotion that expanded filoni creative role into overseeing all-lucasfilm-animation-projects; filoni chose justin-ridge to succeed filoni for season three.
filoni assumed the-role back for the-fourth-season.
the-series has been generally well-received with several-award-wins and nominations.
rebels garnered praise for rebels writing, characters, voice-acting, score, and expansion of the-franchise's-mythology, although rebels received some-criticism for rebels animation and perceived lack of depth.
rebels was nominated for the-critics'-choice-television-award for best-animated-series and the-primetime-emmy-award for outstanding-children's-program.
rebels became the-first-recipient of the-saturn-award for best-animated-series on television, winning for rebels final two seasons.
a-number of tie-in-media have been released to expand upon the-series'-lore such as the-comic-book-series kanan, the-novel a-new-dawn, and the-novel series thrawn.
premise ==
fourteen years after the-fall of the-galactic-republic and the-jedi-order and the-rise of the-galactic-empire depicted in revenge of the-sith, a-motley-group of rebels unite aboard a-freighter-starship called the ghost and begin to conduct covert-operations against the-imperial-garrison on and around the-planet-lothal and other-planets that are menaced by the-galactic-empire.
= cast and characters == ===
taylor-gray as ezra-bridger, a-teenage-con-artist who is taken in by kanan to be trained as a-jedi.
freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, formerly known as jedi-padawan, caleb-dume, who survived the-events of order 66.
freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, formerly known as jedi-padawan, caleb-dume, who survived the-events of order 66 is ezra's-mentor and leader of the-ghost-crew.
vanessa marshall as hera-syndulla, a-twi’lek-pilot turned rebel-commander and the-daughter of ryloth-freedom-fighter-cham-syndulla.
tiya-sircar as sabine-wren, a-young-mandalorian-warrior who's fixated on art.
steven-blum as garazeb-"zeb"-orrelios, a-former-lasat-honor-guard-member who wants the-empire to pay for enslaving his-people.
dave-filoni as chopper ( credited as "himself" prior to the-series-finale), hera's-astromech-droid who can be a bit reckless.
david-oyelowo as agent-kallus, a-member of the-imperial-ground-team tasked with overviewing imperial-activities.
dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex (seasons 2–4), a-former-high-ranking-clone-trooper, who served under anakin-skywalker in the-clone-wars.
sam-witwer as maul (seasons 2–3), a-former-sith-lord and apprentice to palpatine who is attempting to hunt down obi-wan-kenobi.
lars-mikkelsen as grand-admiral-thrawn (seasons 3–4), a-powerful-high-ranking-officer within the-galactic-empire.
recurring ===
jason-isaacs as grand-inquisitor, a-former-jedi-temple-guard who turned to the-dark-side and was tasked with hunting down surviving jedi.
james-earl-jones as darth-vader, an-evil-sith-lord and apprentice to palpatine who was once jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker.
matt-lanter as anakin-skywalker, a-former-jedi-knight who became darth-vader.
ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, the-former-padawan of anakin-skywalker, who aids the-rebellion with pivotal-assets.
stephen-stanton as grand-moff-tarkin, an-imperial-officer who oversees many of the-empire's-activities.
sam-witwer and ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-ruler of the-galaxy and also known as darth-sidious, sith-master of darth-vader.
mary-elizabeth-mcglynn as governor-arihnda-pryce, a-high-ranking-officer of the-galactic-empire and governor of the-lothal-sector.
forest-whitaker as saw-gerrera, a-rebel-extremist and a-former-freedom-fighter.
genevieve-o'reilly as mon-mothma, the-leader of the-rebel-alliance.
guest-appearances ===
anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-protocol-droid who assists allies in the-rebellion.
james-arnold-taylor and stephen-stanton as obi-wan-kenobi, a-jedi-knight in exile on tatooine.
frank-oz as yoda, the-wise-and-powerful-grand-master of the-jedi who is exiled on the-planet-dagobah.
billy-dee-williams as lando-calrissian, a-smuggler in the-underworld.
nathan-kress as wedge-antilles, a-former-imperial-tie-fighter-pilot, who defects to the-rebellion.
episodes == ==
release ==
===-broadcast ===
the-first-two-episodes, titled spark of rebellion, premiered on october 3, 2014, on disney-channels worldwide and on family-channel in canada.
in australia, the series premiered on october 17 on disney-xd.
the-siege of lothal premiered on june 28, 2015, and the-second-season debuted on october 18.
in canada, the series premiered on october 19 on the-dhx-owned-disney-xd.
however, due to dhx-media losing the-rights to disney-content, the-show was later moved to disney-channel.
the second season premiered on november 7, and the-show was moved to disney-channel on december 1.in
the-middle-east and africa, spark of rebellion premiered on october 11 and the-series debuted on october 18 on disney-xd.
siege of lothal premiered on october 10, followed the-official-season-premiere on october 17.
in southeast-asia, spark of rebellion premiered on disney-xd on october 4 and the-series officially started on november 29.
siege of lothal premiered on october 3 on disney-xd-and-disney-channel, and the-second-season was released on october 24.
in the-united-kingdom and ireland, the-series debuted on october 16 on disney-xd.
siege of lothal premiered on july 18, 2015, followed by the-second-season-debut on october 17.
home-media ===
star-wars-rebels:
spark of rebellion was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd in the-us at all-retailers on october 14, 2014.
dvd-bonus-features include character-shorts, a-3d-model-kit of the-ghost-ship, and a-preview of season 1.the
complete-season
one of  star-wars-rebels was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd and blu-ray on september 1, 2015, in america, and in germany on september 10, 2015.
the-season-1-collection contains the-expanded-version of spark of rebellion with the-darth-vader/grand-inquisitor-prologue shown on abc-tv.
the-complete-season two of star-wars-rebels was released by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment on dvd and blu-ray on august 30, 2016, in north-america.
the-complete-season two of star-wars-rebels-star-wars-rebels was released on dvd and blu-ray on august 29, 2017.
the complete season four is announced to be released on dvd and blu-ray on november 15, 2018, in germany, and july 31, 2018, in north-america.
the-series is also available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
reception == ===
ratings ===
in the-united-states, the-one-hour-special garnered 2.74-million-viewers on disney-channel and 2.40-million-viewers on abc.
worldwide, disney-channel delivered a-total of 6.5-million-viewers.
on disney-channel, the-first-and-second-episodes delivered 2.33 million and 1.92-million-viewers, respectively.
the-third-and-fourth-episodes garnered 2.32 million and 1.84 million, respectively.
the-fifth,-sixth,-and-seventh-episodes were watched by 1.43 million, 1.30 million, and 1.60-million-viewers, respectively.
the-fifth,-sixth,-and-seventh-episodes got 1.92-and-1.44-million-viewers, respectively.
in canada, the-second-episode was watched by 274,500-viewers, making the-second-episode the most-watched broadcast ever on the-network.
in the-united-kingdom, the-film was the-highest-rated-broadcast that week, with 81,000-viewers.
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregation-website rotten-tomatoes, the-first-season has received a-92%-positive-score, based on 12-reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a-100%-score based on 6-reviews for season 2, 6-reviews for season 3, and 10-reviews for season 4, with an-average-rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
on metacritic, the-first-season has a-weighted-average-score of 78 out of 100 based on 4-critics, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
ign and variety in particular had strong-praise for the-pilot-film, spark of rebellion, with the-pilot-film, spark of rebellion only criticism being the-appearance of the-wookiees in the-film, being cited as not all that impressive compared to the-rest of the-animation.
accolades === ==
other-media ==
chopper and the-ghost appear in the-2016-film rogue one: a-star-wars-story.
hera's-surname is called on a-loudspeaker at the-rebel-base on yavin-iv, where chopper can briefly be seen.
in addition, the-ghost takes part in the-climactic-battle over scarif.
the-ghost also appears in the-2019-film star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker during the-final-battle over exegol.
the-voice of freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus can also heard in the-2019-film star-wars as one of the-voices of jedi past who provide rey with encouragement to defeat emperor-palpatine.
novels ===
on september 2, 2014, del-rey-books published star-wars: a-new-dawn, a-prequel-novel by john-jackson-miller telling the-story of how kanan and hera met (set about six years before the-series).
one of the-first-canon-star-wars-novels to be released by disney, star-wars-novels also introduces imperial-captain-rae-sloane, who is later-a-grand-admiral in the-aftermath-trilogy (2015–2017).
star-wars-novels includes a-foreword by dave-filoni.
in 2017, a-new-novel, entitled thrawn, was released.
star-wars-novels marked the-entrance of grand-admiral-thrawn into the-current-canon.
it was written by the-character's-original-creator, timothy-zahn.
a-sequel to thrawn, titled thrawn: alliances, was released on july 24, 2018.
a-sequel to thrawn, titled thrawn: alliances explored thrawn's partnerships with darth-vader and anakin-skywalker.
another-thrawn-novel, thrawn: treason was released on july 23, 2019.
it takes place during the-events of rebels'-fourth-season.
hera-syndulla would go on to appear in alexander-freed's-star-wars:
alphabet-squadron  novel-trilogy, as a-general of the-recently-christened-new-republic's-eponymous-starfighter-squadron in the-final-days of the-galactic-civil-war, hunting down the-weakened-imperial-forces after the-battle of endor and the-death of emperor-palpatine.
comics ===
from april 1, 2015, through march 16, 2016, marvel-comics published a-12-issue-comic-series, titled kanan, and set during the-events of the-first-season.
written by former-executive-producer of the-series greg-weisman and illustrated by pepe-larraz, jacopo-camagni and andrea-broccardo, the-story is centered on kanan having flashbacks to kanan days as a-padawan in the-jedi-temple and the-clone-wars.
the-other-members of the-ghost-crew also appear.
in the-summer of 2017, marvel announced that a-comic-book-miniseries-adaptation of zahn's-thrawn-novel was being planned, scheduled to be released in early 2018.
the-first-issue was released on february 14, 2018, with new-issues being released over the-following-five-months.
a few days after the-series-finale was aired, idw-publishing released the-seventh-issue of the-long-running-star-wars-adventures-multi-era-comic-book-series, which contained the first of a-two-part-comic-arc, set between the-second-and-third-season, in which the-spectres embark on a-mission to save a-rare-endangered-bird from imperial-custody.
the-second-part appeared in the-next-issue, which was released on march 28, 2018.
video-games ===
a-side-scrolling-run-and-gun-game based on the-show's-first-season, titled star wars rebels: recon-missions, was released by disney-mobile on ios, android, and windows-store in early 2015, before being discontinued on july 28, 2016, due to the-limitations of the-support-team.
ezra-bridger is the-only-playable-character, with other-characters available via in-app purchases, which also grant early-access to most of the-game's-levels in the-mobile-versions and are required to play the-full-campaign in the-windows-store-version.
additionally, several of the-characters from the-series are playable in other-games such as disney-infinity 3.0, angry-birds-star-wars-ii, roblox (as virtual-accessories and gears), lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (as downloadable-content only),
star-wars:
galactic-defense,-star-wars:
force-arena and star-wars: galaxy of heroes.
vanessa-marshall reprises  vanessa-marshall role as hera-syndulla for the-2020-video-game star-wars: squadrons, providing voice-work and motion-capture for the-character.
themes == ===
historical-influences ===
characters in star-wars-rebels have taken influence from biblical,-hebrew,-and-greco-roman-mythological-names.
star-wars-writers have often used biblical-names for jedi while giving galactic-imperial-characters roman-names.
in 2015 an-interview was conducted with dave-filoni and simon-kinberg where kinsberg stated that they wanted to connect to the-original-films by using the-biblical-naming-scheme seen in the-original-films.
both-caleb and ezra are historically hebrew-names with ezra translating to "helper".
characters with roman-names include clone-captain-rex which translates to "king" in latin along with sabine-wren, admiral-brom-titus and admiral-kassius-konstantine.
references == ==
see also ==
2015 in science-fiction ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars-rebels at starwars.com
star-wars-rebels at imdb ‹the
template-tv.com-show is being considered for deletion.›-star-wars-rebels at tv.com-dk-publishing for star-wars-rebels-star-wars-rebels on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
star-wars:
the-force awakens –
original-motion-picture-soundtrack is the-film-score to the-2015-film of the-same-name composed by john-williams with john-williams and william-ross conducting, and gustavo-dudamel appearing as a-"special-guest-conductor".
original-motion-picture-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 18, 2015, in both-digipak-cd and digital-formats.
the-score received critical-acclaim, receiving praise for its-new-themes and use of old-ones.
the-main-theme, "rey's-theme", was the-subject of mass-acclaim, with the-track reaching 10-million-views on youtube.
for the-score, john-williams received john-williams 50th oscar nomination, being nominated for the-academy-award for best-original-score, john-williams first nomination for a-star-wars-film since return of the-jedi.
john-williams won the-saturn-award for best-music, john-williams first win since revenge of the-sith.
john-williams also won the-grammy-award for best-score-soundtrack for visual-media for the-score, making it john-williams 11th win in the-category.
overview ==
in july 2013, john-williams was confirmed to return to compose the-sequel-trilogy, beginning with the force awakens.
the-music from the-first-two-trailers for the-film was reworked from earlier-compositions.
john-williams began working on the-score in december 2014 and by june 2015, john-williams had been through most of the-film-reels, working on a-daily-basis.
in may 2015, john-williams said john-williams would reuse themes from the-previous-films, such as those for luke, leia and han, in ways that "will seem very natural and right in the-moments for which we've chosen to do these-kinds of quotes.
there aren't many of them, but there are a few that i think are important and will seem very much a part of the-fabric of the-piece in a-positive-and-constructive-way."
he said that working with j.-j.-abrams was similar to the-process he went through with george-lucas in the-earlier-films.
recording-sessions for the-force-awakens began on june 1, 2015, at the-sony-pictures-studios'-barbra-streisand-scoring-stage in culver-city, with william-ross conducting most of the-music.
he attended recording-sessions for the force awakens and conducted the-remainder of the-recordings.
he called the-recording-process “very luxurious,” with 12-sessions scattered over a-five-month-period between june and november.
the-score was recorded by the-london-symphony-orchestra—making it the first live-action star wars soundtrack not to feature the-london-symphony-orchestra—with sessions continuing on and off over that-five-month-period.
the-london-symphony-orchestra recorded 175-minutes of music, although nearly-an-hour of that was discarded, modified, or rerecorded as abrams re-edited the-film.
the-theme for snoke was recorded by a-24-voice-men’s-chorus.
gustavo-dudamel conducted the-opening-and-end-title-music for the-film at williams'-behest.
the-last-recording-session took place on november 14, 2015.leading up to the-release of the-force
awakens multiple-music-streaming-services began offering users star-wars-themed-playlists. "
streaming-platforms didn't exist for the-[previous]-movies, so that's something that we'll be rolling out, along with character-driven-playlists with sounds and dialogue from the-movie," said ken-bunt, president of the-disney-music-group.
people love to hear dialogue and sound effects, so we're working on some-ideas now that will incorporate some of that into playlisting.
" upon its-release, the-soundtrack for the force awakens became available to stream via spotify.
==-reception ==
the-musical-score has received critical-acclaim.
james-southall of movie-wave said, "the-new-themes are great, hearing the-old-ones again is wonderful, the-action-music is remarkably energetic and the-musical-storytelling as vibrant as ever.
it’s just-so-good-hearing williams return to this-universe."
jørn-tillnes of soundtrack-geek said, "the-fact is that this-score is not even close to the-classic-trilogy and this-score struggles with the-prequel-trilogy as well.
i don’t know if it's the weakest in the-saga.
time will tell.
what i do know is that it's one of the-best-scores i've heard in a-while.
udiscover gave the-score a-positive-review, saying, "the-expansive,-dramatic-passages are as full-bodied as one would hope for a-film as epic as the force awakens, but the-attention to detail within the-score – and the-exquisitely-recorded-performance – make the-results a subtle and engaging listen. "
jonathan-broxton of movie-music-uk praised the-score, saying, "even when you look at it objectively, what john-williams has achieved with the-score is nothing short of remarkable.
he has written five-new-themes, two of which – 'rey's-theme' and the-'march of the-resistance' – are wonderfully memorable, and can stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the-already-bulging-cache of memorable-themes within the-star-wars-universe.
it was nominated for best-original-score-category at 88th-academy-awards and lost to ennio-morricone's-score for the hateful eight.
commercial-performance ==
the-soundtrack debuted at number five on the-billboard 200-chart for the-week ending november 26, 2015, with 100,000-album-equivalent-units, of which 94,000 were pure-album-sales.
it marked the-highest-debut for a-score-only-soundtrack since 1999, when the-phantom-menace placed at number 3.
additionally, it is the-sixth-star-wars-soundtrack in the-main-star-wars-film-series to reach the top ten;  only-the-return of the-jedi-soundtrack failed to reach top ten, peaking at number 20 in 1983.
the-jedi-soundtrack has sold 206,000-copies in the-us as of april 2016.
track-listing ==
all-music is composed by john-williams.
personnel ==
credits adopted from allmusic: ==
additional-music ==
additional-music featured in the force awakens: == charts == ==
references ==
star-wars:
return of the-jedi is a-1984-arcade-game by atari, inc. and the--follow-up to 1983's-star-wars-arcade-game.
a-1984-arcade-game by atari, inc. and the--follow-up to 1983's-star-wars-arcade-game uses raster-graphics, rather than vector-graphics which were used for the first and third atari arcade games based on the-star-wars-franchise.
home-ports were released by domark for the-amstrad-cpc, zx-spectrum, atari-st, commodore 64, and amiga in 1988.
the-game is included as an-unlockable-extra on star wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike for gamecube.
gameplay ==
the-player takes control of three-different-vehicles in stages based upon the-return of the-jedi-film.
gameplay is from a-3/4-isometrically-projected-perspective and is broken into several-stages.
in the-first-stage, the-player pilots a-speeder-bike to the-ewok-village.
the-next-stage involves piloting the-millennium-falcon to destroy a-reactor.
another-speeder-bike-stage follows.
the-next-stage involves piloting both-an-at-st and the-millennium-falcon in rapid-succession in a-fight against a-star-destroyer.
==-reception ==
in japan, game-machine listed star-wars:
return of the-jedi on the-jedi february 15, 1985 issue as being the-sixth-most-successful-upright-arcade-unit of the-year.
references == ==
external-links ==
return of the-jedi at the-killer-list of videogames return of the-jedi at the arcade history database return of the-jedi at the-gameroom-blog-star-wars: droids – the-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po is a-1985-animated-television-series spin off from the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
it focuses on the-exploits of droids r2-d2 and c-3po between the-events of revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope.
the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc with lucasfilm sister series ewoks (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour).the-series
ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale.
the-opening-theme, "trouble again", was performed by stewart-copeland of the-police.
during the-series was produced by nelvana on behalf of lucasfilm and broadcast on abc with its-sister-series ewoks (as part of the ewoks and droids adventure hour).the-series ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale-adventures, the-droids find the-droids in the-service of successive-new-masters, and encounter minor-characters from the-original-trilogy such as boba-fett and ig-88.
premise ==
droids follows the-adventures of r2-d2 and c-3po as droids face off against gangsters, criminals, pirates, bounty-hunters, the-galactic-empire and other-threats.
during their-adventures, droids find droids in the-service of successive-new-masters and in difficult-situations as a-result.
the-series was retroactively placed four years after revenge of the-sith and fifteen years before the-events of a-new-hope.
in the-latter-film, c-3po tells luke-skywalker that his-and-r2-d2's-"last-master was captain-antilles.
" the-droids are placed in antilles'-care by bail-organa at the-end of revenge of the-sith, creating an-apparent-continuity-error.
this is explained by the-droids being accidentally separated from antilles during the-events of the-animated-series.
== cast and characters == ===
anthony-daniels as c-3po
; anthony-daniels as c-3po also portrayed the-character in the-films.
recurring/guest ===
don-francks as jann-tosh, boba-fett, kybo-ren-cha-winston-rekert as sise-fromm, mungo-baobab-graeme-campbell as proto-one, admiral-terrinald-screed, and lord-toda-peter-macneill as jord-dusat
taborah-johnson as jessica-meade-john-stocker as vlix-oncard, greej, zatec-cha, and sollag-rob-cowan as thall-joben-dan-hennessey as jord-dusat (episode 4), uncle-gundy, jyn-obah, vinga, yorpa, governor-koong, and captain-cag-cree-summer as princess-gerin
jan-austin as auren-yomm-long-john-baldry as the-great-heep-lesleh-donaldson as kea-moll-chris-wiggins as mon-julpa-stephen-ouimette
as the-narrator winston-rekert as tig-frommother-guest-stars include george-buza, andrew-sabiston, eric-peterson, jamie-dick, donny-burns, alan-fawcett, don-mcmanus, and gordon-masten.
production and broadcast ==
the-series was produced by the-canadian-company nelvana for lucasfilm.
several-episodes were written by star-wars-sound-designer-ben-burtt.
hanho-heung-up-co. was the-korean-company hired to animate  the-series.
in the-uk, bbc-television bought rights to screen
the-series in bbc-television entirety between 1986 and 1991 as part of the-children's-bbc-programming-strand.
the-series was shown twice within this-time (in 1986 and 1988 to coincide with the-full-release of the-star-wars-trilogy as well as droids on vhs).
the-great-heep only made one showing in 1989 on bbc's going live!
which was a-saturday-morning-children's-show—it was split into two-parts over two-weeks.
different-episodes from different-cycles were also screened across the-five-year-licence, with the-trigon-cycle being shown in full in early 1991 on another-saturday-morning-children's-show called the 8:15 from manchester.
the-opening-theme, "in trouble again", was performed by stewart-copeland of the-police and written by stewart-copeland of the-police and derek-holt.
the-series was broadcast on abc with abc sister series ewoks (as part of the-ewoks-and-droids-adventure-hour).
it debuted in 1985 as part of a-fitness-special hosted by tony-danza and live-action-versions of the-droids.
it ran for one-season of 13-half-hour-episodes; an-hour-long-special-broadcast in 1986 serves as the-finale.
droids and ewoks were later shown in reruns on sci-fi-channel's-cartoon-quest in 1996, although somewhat edited for time.
episodes ==
over the-course of the-series, the-droids team up with three-different-sets of masters.
the-series falls into three-cycles or arcs; the-droids usually run into the-droids new-masters at the-beginning of each, and at the-end are forced to leave.
the-great-heep, a-48-minute-television-special following the-series, is set before the-final-arc.
merchandising ==
in 1985, kenner produced a-toy-line based on the-series, including action-figures, ship-models, and other-items.
two-action-figures, boba-fett and a-wing-pilot, were repackaged figures from the-main-star-wars-line.
the-main-star-wars-line was canceled after the-first-group of 12-figures due to decreasing-popularity with star-wars.
in 1987 and then 1988, glasslite of brazil issued remaining-kenner-stock and produced a-very-limited-run of remaining-return of the-jedi-and-droids-toys from a-sell off.
certain-vehicles, mini-rigs and action-figures were issued by the-company in new-packaging.
vlix was an-action-figure exclusive from unused-molds by kenner.
like the-remainder of the-glasslite-line, very few were made, even less were sold and most were recycled due to the-failing-economy when money was tight across the-country.
vlix was the-most-valuable-star-wars-action-figure (at about $6,000 carded or $1,200 loose), until a-fett-figure sold for £69,000 ($usd 92,000) at an-auction.
a-book was issued in the-uk of the-episode "a-race to the-finish" as well as another-book that had limited-print-runs.
plans to release a-storybook and cassette of the-trigon-cycle for the-publishing-company rainbow were abandoned after the-publishing-company rainbow lost the-rights to re-issue the-publishing-company rainbow star wars
run which included a-new-hope , the-empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, planet of the-hoojibs, droid-world and return of the-jedi: the-battle of endor due to poor-reflective-sales of buena-vista's-"further-adventure"-series overseas which included mission to ord-mantell, an-ewok-adventure and ewoks: the-battle for endor.
a-computer-game was released in 1988 for the-zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc and commodore 64 by mastertronic.
a-computer-game went largely unnoticed and was pulled from production due to licensing-rights of the-end-title-theme-tune being used.
comic-book-series ===
in 1986, marvel's-star-comics-imprint published a-star-wars: droids-comic-series spun off from the-cartoon.
the-bi-monthly-series ran for eight-issues.
four-issues and issue 5's
cover of the-series were drawn by john-romita, sr.
the "lost in time" crossover story from droids #4 was continued in an-issue of ewoks.
the-last-three-issues are part of an-arc recounting the-original-star-wars-film from the-droids'-point of view.
additionally, spanish-comics-publisher-editorial-gepsa produced two-page-droids-comics as part of an-anthology-series.
home-media ==
almost-all-episodes of the-series (except "coby and the-starhunters") were released on vhs in the-1980s and 1990s, most notably the uk pal releases over four-cassettes (droids 1–3 and the-great-heep), which had the-opening-sequences and credits edited out.
in 1996, rick-mccallum produced the-pirates and the-prince, a direct-to-video film compiled from four-episodes.
in late 2004, rick-mccallum and 20th-century fox-home-entertainment produced a-dvd titled star wars: animated-adventures – droids, which featured the-pirates and the-prince and treasure of the-hidden-planet, a-new-compilation-film including narration from mungo-baobab (voiced by alex-lindsay).
both-titles included some-soundtrack-changes.
on april 2, 2021, it was announced that the-entire-series would be released on disney+
later in 2021.
==-reception ==
according to david-perlmutter, compared with ewoks, droids "was rudimentary, with short-enough-story-lines for as-many-as-four-narratives in a-single-episode.
obviously, neither-lucas nor the-animation-studio had enough-faith in the-characters to trust the-animation-studio as anything other than second-bananas."
ben-burtt wrote liner-notes for the-shadows of the-empire-soundtrack, which referenced the roonstones ben-burtt had written about in droids; ben-burtt made a-cameo-appearance in episode-i – the-phantom-menace, and named ben-burtt character after the-baobabs.
several-references to the-animated-series are made in the-prequels, such as the-boonta-eve-classic in the-phantom-menace, the-planet-bogden and a-four-armed-cook in attack of the-clones, and general-grievous'-wheel-bike-design in revenge of the-sith.
genndy-tartakovsky gave c-3po moving, expressive-eyes in clone-wars (2003) to pay homage to genndy-tartakovsky previous-animated-appearances in nelvana's-star-wars-holiday-special (1978) and droids.
while droids was excluded in the-2014-rebranding of star-wars-canon, recurring-villain-admiral-screed—"the-emperor's-right-hand-man during the-early-days of the-empire"—makes-appearances in canon-novels such as tarkin (2014) and aftermath:
life-debt (2016).
additionally, possible-sources of inspiration for sequel trilogy-main-characters rey and kylo-ren have been noticed.
references ==
further-reading ==
star-wars: droids 1985, george-lucas, ben burtt star-wars insider #27
a-guide to the-star-wars-universe
the-star-wars-encyclopedia by stephen-j.-sansweet, isbn 0-345-40227-8-del-rey; first edition (june 30, 1998) ==
external-links ==
star-wars: droids at imdb
the-great-heep at imdb
the-pirates and the-prince at imdb-treasure of the-hidden-planet at imdb ‹the
template-tv.com-show is being considered for deletion.›
star-wars: droids at tv.com
star-wars:
droids at the-big-cartoon-database
the-droids re-animated, part-1---starwars.com
the-droids
re-animated,
part-2---starwars.com
starwars.com
"closer-look"
a-history of home-video-releases of star-wars:
droids-episode-review of the-white-witch
a-fan-"droids-encyclopedia"-blog at starwars.com
this-list provides an-index of video-game-titles in banpresto's-super-robot-wars-franchise.
most of the-games in the-series are tactical-role-playing-games but several-games representing other-genres were also released.
list is divided by video-game-genre and ordered by initial-release-date.
only the original games, neo-super-robot-wars and super-robot-wars-compact, had final-bosses that were not directly created by banpresto.
tactical-role-playing-games ==
other-genres == ==
notes == ==
references ==
external-links ==
super-robot-wars-official-website-super-robot-wars-official-20th-anniversary-website
the-mandalorian, an-american-space-western-web-television-series set in the-star-wars-universe created by jon-favreau and released on disney+, features an-extensive-cast of characters.
since the-show's-debut on november 12, 2019, only-one-character has appeared in every-episode: the-protagonist and title-character, a-bounty-hunter named, "din-djarin".
grogu (the-child) is a-young-alien of the-same-species as star-wars-character-yoda and the-show's-hugely-popular-breakout-character, colloquially known among fans and writers as "baby-yoda".
several-supporting-characters appeared in at-least-three-episodes of the-first-season of the-mandalorian.
these include allies of the-mandalorian such as cara-dune, greef-karga, ig-11, kuiil, and the-armorer.
the-primary-villains of the-series belong to a-remnant of the-galactic-empire, which is led by moff-gideon and includes such-agents as the-client and dr.-pershing.
a-handful of guest-characters made appearances in single-episodes, including villagers from the-planet sorgan in "chapter 4: sanctuary", a-band of mercenaries in "chapter 6: the-prisoner", and several-minor-antagonists.
indicator(s)
this-section shows characters who will appear or have appeared in at-least-one-season of the-series.
starring === ===
recurring-co-stars ===
the-following-cast-members have been credited as co-starring in at-least-two-episodes within a-season.
featured co-stars ===
the-following-cast-members have been credited as co-starring in a-single-episode within a-season in which the-following-cast-members play a-significant-role.
guest starring === ==
main-characters == ===
the mandalorian ===
the-mandalorian, sometimes abbreviated as mando, is a-sobriquet for din-djarin, the-protagonist of the-mandalorian television series.
introduced as a-bounty-hunter, a-bounty-hunter is a-member of the-mandalorian-culture, as evidenced by a-bounty-hunter beskar armor and a-bounty-hunter distinctive helmet, which a-bounty-hunter never removes in front of anyone.
he was a-"foundling" who was rescued at a-young-age by the-mandalorians and adopted into their-culture prior to the-events of the-series, after he parents were murdered by separatist-battle-droids during the-clone-wars, which resulted in he intense hatred of droids.
in the-television-series, the mandalorian encounters a-young-alien known as "the-child", whom he attempts to protect from a-remnant of the-now-fallen-galactic-empire.
mandalorian is portrayed and voiced by pedro-pascal, and stunt-actors brendan-wayne and lateef-crowder perform as body-doubles when pedro-pascal is unavailable.
pedro-pascal has cited clint-eastwood as an-influence on the-character, and many-comparisons have been drawn between the-mandalorian-and-eastwood's-man with no-name.
the-mandalorian-creator jon-favreau suggested pedro-pascal watch akira-kurosawa's-samurai-films and eastwood's-spaghetti-westerns as preparation for the-role.
the-mandalorian-character and pascal's-performance have been well received by audiences and critics.
grogu, also known as "the-child" and colloquially referred to by fans and the-media as "baby-yoda", is a-young-alien of the-same-species as popular-star-wars-character-yoda.
although 50 years old, he is still an-infant by the-standards of he species, and although he cannot yet speak, he demonstrates a-strong-natural-ability with the-force.
a-remnant of the-galactic-empire led by moff-gideon is seeking the-child to extract  a-remnant of the-galactic-empire led by moff-gideon blood for dr.-pershing's-secret-experiments; the-bounty-hunter known as "the-mandalorian" is hired to track grogu down.
instead of turning him over, however, the mandalorian attempts to protect the-child from the-imperials.
by the-end of the-first-season, the-child is adopted into the-mandalorian-culture as a-"foundling", and the-mandalorian" is tasked with reuniting the-child with others of the-child kind.
the-child has been hugely popular with fans and reviewers, becoming the-show's-breakout-character, and the-subject of many-internet-memes.
the-show's-breakout-character was conceived by jon-favreau out of a-desire to explore the-mystery around yoda and the-show's-breakout-character species, and was developed in early-conversations about the-series between jon-favreau and executive-producer-dave-filoni.
the-child is mostly a-creation of animatronics and puppetry, although accentuated with computer-generated-imagery.
the-child is voiced by sound-editor-david-acord with the-aid of various-sound-effects.
the-guardian called baby-yoda "2019's biggest new character", and many have described  the-child as a-key-part in the-success of the-disney+-streaming-service.
recurring-characters ==
several-characters have been featured in more-than-one-episode within a-season of the-mandalorian.
introduced in season one === ====
greef-karga ====
greef-karga is a-leader of the-bounty-hunters'-guild, who serves as both-an-ally and adversary to the-mandalorian at different-points in the-show's-first-season.
operating out of the-planet nevarro, greef gives assignments to bounty-hunters and ensures everyone follows the-guild's-code.
greef provides the-assignment that leads the-mandalorian to meet the-child.
when the-mandalorian refuses to turn the-child over to the-imperials, greef leads a-group of bounty-hunters in an-unsuccessful-attempt to take the-child from the-child.
greef later devises a-plan to kill the-mandalorian and return the-child to the-imperials, but when the-child saves the-child life, greef has a-change of heart and helps protect greef from the-empire.
greef-karga is portrayed by carl-weathers, whom jon-favreau knew through the-directors-guild of america.
carl-weathers accepted the-part under the-condition that carl-weathers could direct future-episodes of the-mandalorian in the-second-season.
greef-karga was originally to appear only in a-handful of episodes, but jon-favreau and the-writers liked the-character so much that the-part was expanded.
carl-weathers performs carl-weathers own stunts in the-role.
the-character has received generally-positive-feedback from fans and reviewers.
the-client
the-client is a-mysterious-and-unnamed-agent of the-imperial-remnant.
the-client hires the-mandalorian, as well as several-other-bounty-hunters, to recover the-child on behalf of the-client superior, moff-gideon.
the-client does not reveal why the-client wants the-child, but the-client orders the-client colleague, dr.-pershing, to "extract the-necessary-material" from the-client.
the-mandalorian delivers the-child to the-client, but later rescues the-child back.
the-client conspires to recapture the-mandalorian and the-child, but after the-mandalorian returns to him, the-client is shot and killed by stormtroopers under gideon's-orders.
the-client is portrayed by german-film-director-werner-herzog, who was recruited for the-part by jon-favreau.
herzog accepted the-role in part to help finance herzog film family romance, llc (2019).
herzog was not familiar with jon-favreau's-previous-work, nor had herzog ever seen a-star-wars-film, but herzog was impressed with the-screenplays and filmmaking-style of the-mandalorian.
herzog strongly urged the-show's-filmmakers to use puppetry for the-child-character and not-computer-generated-imagery, calling the-show's-filmmakers "cowards" for considering using cgi in its-place.
the-client-character and herzog's-performance have received generally-positive-reviews from critics.
dr.-pershing ====
dr.-pershing ==== is a-doctor and scientist affiliated with the-imperial-remnant who works with the-client in dr.-pershing ====
attempts to capture the-child.
he has appeared in several-episodes of the-mandalorian, starting with the-series-premiere "chapter 1:
the-mandalorian", in which he is present on an-imperial-compound on nevarro when the-client hires the-mandalorian to track down and deliver the-child.
when the-client says the-client is willing to pay half-price for proof of termination, pershing objects and says the-child should be delivered alive.
pershing appears again in "chapter 3: the sin", when the-mandalorian delivers the-child to the-client.
later, when discussing the-child, the-client orders pershing to "extract the-necessary-material and be done with it", but pershing again protests, noting pershing again protests-employer has explicitly ordered pershing again protests to bring the-child back alive.
the-mandalorian later returns to the-imperial-compound to rescue the-child, killing all-the-stormtroopers there and finding pershing with the-child, who is sedated and strapped into laboratory-equipment.
when  the-mandalorian threatens pershing, the-scientist pleads for mercy and insists the-scientist protected the-child and prevented the-child from being killed.
the-mandalorian takes the-child and leaves pershing unharmed.
pershing returns in season two.
the-mandalorian-witnesses a-hologram-recording of pershing, who is providing an-update to moff-gideon on moff-gideon experiments involving grogu's-blood.
when the-dark-troopers apprehend grogu, moff-gideon instructs moff-gideon comms officer to inform dr.-pershing of grogu's retrieval.
in the-season-finale, dr.-pershing of grogu's-retrieval is captured by the-mandalorian and dr.-pershing of grogu's-retrieval companions; dr.-pershing of grogu's-retrieval helps dr.-pershing of grogu's-retrieval captors infiltrate gideon's-ship in order to rescue grogu.
dr.-pershing of grogu's-retrieval is portrayed by omid-abtahi, who previously voiced a-mandalorian-character named amis in the-animated-series star-wars: the-clone-wars.
dr.-pershing of grogu's-retrieval's-costume includes a-patch on pershing's-costume right-arm with an-insignia similar to one worn by clones in the-cloning-facility on the-planet-kamino in the-prequel-film-star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
this has led to speculation among some-fans and writers that pershing's-plans for the-child involve cloning.
pershing also wears glasses, making pershing the first human live-action character in disney's-star-wars-canon to do so.
this was contrary to a-rule-star-wars-creator-george-lucas imposed, before selling the-franchise to disney, that no-character wear glasses in the-star-wars-universe.
pershing's-costume, which also included a-grey-shirt with white-shoulders and a-high-collar, was ranked eighth on a-screen-rant-list of the-ten-best-costumes in the-first-season of the-mandalorian.
inverse-writer-allie-gemmill called dr.-pershing an interesting character, particularly due to the-mystery behind  inverse-writer-allie-gemmill possible-association with kamino.
kuiil ====
kuiil ==== is an-alien of the-ugnaught-species, and a-former-indentured-servant of the-galactic-empire.
a-former-indentured-servant of the-galactic-empire is living in solitude on the-planet arvala-7 when a-former-indentured-servant of the-galactic-empire encounters the-mandalorian, who comes to the-planet to find and capture the-child.
kuiil assists him, and then later helps him rebuild him-ship when his-ship is dismantled by jawas.
kuiil also rebuilds the-bounty-hunter-droid ig-11 after the-mandalorian destroys him.
kuiil and ig-11 later join the-mandalorian on a-mission to protect the-child from the-imperial-remnant on the-planet-nevarro, where  kuiil is shot and killed by imperial-scout-troopers while attempting to bring the-child to safety.
kuiil is voiced by nick-nolte, who completed  kuiil recordings for all-the-character's-dialogue in a-single-afternoon.
kuiil's-on-set-performance was done by misty-rosas, who during filming wore a-face-mask brought to life through animatronics and puppetry, with its-electronics and wires concealed in the-backpack and pockets of  kuiil's-costume.
kuiil has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike.
several-critics have called  kuiil the best character on the-show, and  kuiil-signature-line
"i have spoken" became one of the-better-known-and-best-liked-lines of dialogue from the-series.
==== ig-11 ==== ig-11 is a-bounty-hunter-droid who initially attempts to capture and kill the-child, but is later reprogrammed to become hunter-droid-nurse and protector.
the-mandalorian-first-encounters
==== ig-11 ==== ig-11 when both attempt to collect the-bounty on the-child.
they work together to extract the-child from a-gang of mercenaries, but when ig-11 tries to kill the-child, the-mandalorian instead shoots and kills the-droid.
ig-11's-remains are recovered by kuiil, who repairs and reprograms ig-11's-remains.
the-droid later joins the-mandalorian on a-mission to nevarro to protect the-child from the-imperial-remnant, and though the-mandalorian does not initially trust the-child,
ig-11 ultimately sacrifices the-child own-life to protect the-child and the-child allies.
ig-11 is voiced by taika-waititi, who was offered the-part by jon-favreau based on their-work together on marvel-films.
waititi said waititi tried to create a-voice that lacked human-emotion while still maintaining some-semblance of humanity, describing it as a-cross between siri and hal 9000.
ig-11 was mistaken for the-star-wars-bounty-hunter ig-88 when first unveiled due to the-resemblance between the-two-characters.
ig-11 has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike, with some calling  ig-11 one of the-best-droids in the-franchise.
the-armorer ====
the-armorer ==== is the-leader of a-tribe of mandalorian-warriors on nevarro, which includes the-show's-title-character.
she provides spiritual-guidance for the-clan, and forges and repairs the-clan armor, including a-new-set of armor she makes for the-mandalorian.
in the-first-season-finale "chapter 8: redemption", the-armorer instructs the-mandalorian to watch over and protect the-child, and to reunite the-child with others of the-child own-kind.
the-child was partially inspired by the-films of akira-kurosawa, as well as the-history and culture of the-samurai, particularly in the-child's deliberately-paced movement and aura of authority.
the-armorer is portrayed by emily-swallow, who provides both-the-child's-voice-and-live-action-performance, while she-stunts are performed by lauren-mary-kim.
when swallow auditioned for the-role, she knew little about the-child and did not know it was for a-star-wars-series.
aspects of the-mandalorian-director-deborah-chow's-personality influenced swallow's-portrayal of the-character.
kim's-combat-style in the-armorer's-fight-scenes was inspired by the-filipino-martial-art known as kali.
the-armorer has been received positively by fans and reviewers alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.
cara-dune ====
cara-dune is a-former-rebel-shock-trooper from alderaan who became a-mercenary after the-fall of the-empire.
originally from alderaan,  cara is a-highly-trained-warrior and skilled-battle-tactician.
cara harbors an-intense-hatred for the-empire, and is having trouble readjusting to post-war-life.
cara first encounters the-mandalorian on the-planet-sorgan, where cara work together to protect a-local-village from raiders.
he later recruits cara to help protect the-child from the-imperial-remnant.
cara is portrayed by former mixed martial artist gina carano, for whom favreau specifically created the-character, without auditioning any-other-actresses.
favreau sought to create a-powerful-and-independent-character, but one different from princess-leia or other-strong-star-wars-female-characters.
carano performed many of carano own-stunts, and carano credits bryce-dallas-howard, who directed the-character's-first-appearance in "chapter 4: sanctuary", with helping translate the-character from the-script to the-screen.
cara has been received positively by reviewers and fans, and has been described as a-feminist-role-model.
some-critics called carano unique even among the-star-wars-franchise's-female-characters due to carano physicality and combat-skills.
peli-motto ====
peli-motto ==== is a-mechanic who manages a-spaceport on tatooine, and is featured in "chapter 5
:-the-gunslinger", "chapter 9:
the-marshal" and "chapter 10:
the-passenger".
the-mandalorian hires the-mandalorian to repair the-mandalorian ship, and the-mandalorian also comes to take care of the-child.
the-bounty-hunter-toro-calican briefly takes peli and the-child as hostages in an-unsuccessful-attempt to abduct the-mandalorian.
when-the-mandalorian-returns to tatooine in search of another rumored to be there, peli and the child guides
the-bounty-hunter toro-calican to mos-pelgo where the-bounty-hunter toro-calican finds cobb-vanth with boba-fett's-armor.
the-mandalorian later gives the-bounty-hunter-toro-calican the-task of taking the-frog-lady to trask where the-mandalorian husband has knowledge of other-mandalorians'-whereabouts.
peli is portrayed by actress and comedian-amy-sedaris, who had previously worked with the-mandalorian-creator-jon-favreau on the-film-elf (2003).
sedaris said sedaris enjoyed working with the-animatronic-child-puppet, which sedaris said made everyone on the-set happy: "
the minute you looked into baby-yoda's-eyes you just got lost."
the-character-and-sedaris-performance drew acclaim from fans and reviewers, so much so that sedaris became a-trending-topic on twitter after the-episode first became available.
fennec shand ====
fennec-shand is an-assassin and mercenary for the-galaxy's-top-crime-syndicates, who is sought by toro-calican for toro-calican first bounty hunting assignment.
toro-calican catches fennec with assistance from the-mandalorian.
when fennec tries to convince toro to free toro so they could capture the-mandalorian and deliver toro to the-bounty-hunters'-guild, toro instead kills fennec and seeks to capture the-mandalorian.
toro-body is later approached by an-unidentified-character.
her-body is later revealed that an-unidentified-character was boba-fett, who patched toro up with some-cybernetics.
in "chapter 14:
the-tragedy", fennec accompanied boba-fett to tython in order to reclaim boba-fett armor from the-mandalorian's-ship.
during a-standoff with the-mandalorian, the three of them come under attack by the-stormtroopers dispatched by moff-gideon.
fennec managed to decimate some-the-stormtroopers dispatched by moff-gideon which also involved sending a-boulder into fennec machine gun.
when the-dark-troopers make off with grogu and the-razor-crest is destroyed, fennec and boba-fett declare fennec and boba-fett in the-mandalorian's-debt and agree to help boba-fett grogu.
portrayed by actress-ming-na-wen, fennec-shand is the-first-major-star-wars-villain-character portrayed by an-asian-actress.
elements of the-character's-personality were inspired by characteristics of the-fennec-fox, including its-trickiness, stealthiness, maneuverability, and ability to survive.
the-fennec-fox also influenced the-design of fennec's-costume and hairstyle.
costume-designer-joseph-porro incorporated orange-accents into fennec's-black-costume, and wen recommended the-character's-hair include braids inspired by the-fennec-fox.
fennec-shand has been received positively by reviewers and fans alike, and has been described as a fan favorite.
several-reviewers felt the-character was eliminated too quickly and did not get the-chance to live up to the-character potential, and some-critics have speculated that the-character could still be alive.
this is confirmed in the-second-season-episode "chapter 14:
the-tragedy" that fennec-shand is alive, discovered and saved by boba-fett before fennec-shand injuries proved fatal.
moff-gideon ====
moff-gideon is the-leader of the-imperial-remnant and the-primary-antagonist of the-mandalorian.
few-details of  moff-gideon-backstory have yet been revealed.
moff-gideon was previously an-operative in the-imperial-security-bureau, a-covert-intelligence-arm and secret-police for the-empire, and played a-role in past-efforts to eliminate the-mandalorians.
in the-mandalorian,  moff-gideon is attempting to abduct the-child to extract the-child blood for experimentation.
in the-first-season,  moff-gideon briefly traps the mandalorian and  moff-gideon allies on nevarro in an-unsuccessful-attempt to obtain the-child.
gideon reveals  gideon knows secret-details about the mandalorian and  gideon allies, and is the-first-character in the-series to reveal the-mandalorian's-real-name, din-djarin.
in the-final-scene of the-first-season-finale "chapter 8: redemption", it is revealed that  gideon possesses the-darksaber, a-mandalorian-lightsaber.
gideon returns in the-second-season as  gideon continues to track down grogu. "
chapter 12:
the-siege" reveals that  gideon requires access to grogu's-blood, which contains a-high-'m-count', for it to be transfused into a-test-subject.
however, the-experiments have thus far resulted in "catastrophic-failure".
later in the-season, gideon apprehends grogu and seeks to continue the-experimentation, but the-mandalorian captures dr.-pershing and infiltrates gideon's ship.
gideon battles the-mandalorian with the-darksaber, but is ultimately defeated.
as a-platoon of dark-troopers attempt to rescue him, luke-skywalker arrives and destroys the-droids.
gideon attempts suicide, but is incapacitated by cara-dune.
grogu is taken by skywalker to be trained as a-jedi.
gideon is portrayed by giancarlo-esposito.
gideon was recruited for the-part by jon-favreau, who had previously worked with giancarlo-esposito on several-projects.
gideon has been received positively by reviewers and fans.
introduced in season two === ====
boba-fett ====
==== is a-mandalorian-bounty-hunter who first appeared in the empire strikes back.
having survived the sarlacc pit boba fett ==== fell into in return of the-jedi, boba fett ====
makes boba fett ==== return in a-silent-cameo in "chapter 9:
the-marshal".
the-marshal" reappears in "chapter 14:
the-tragedy", where  the-marshal" is revealed to have saved fennec-shand on tatooine after the-events of "chapter 5: the-gunslinger".
initially demanding din to return din armor which the latter had acquired from cobb-vanth, din and fennec later aid din in battling gideon's-forces as gideon regains gideon armor in the-process.
when the-dark-troopers make off with grogu and the-razor-crest is destroyed, fett and fennec swear to help the mandalorian rescue grogu as repayment-din returning the mandalorian rescue grogu armor.
fett is played by temuera-morrison, who previously portrayed boba's-father jango fett (whom boba is a biological clone of) in star-wars:
episode-ii---attack of the-clones and voiced boba in the-2004-dvd-releases of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
frog-lady ====
the-"frog-lady" is a-female-frog-like-creature who appears in "chapter 10:
the-passenger" and "chapter 11:
the-heiress".
the-heiress" enlists the-mandalorian to take the-heiress" and the-heiress" eggs to the-moon-trask to be reunited with the-heiress" husband, who can fertilize her-eggs, in exchange for information on other-mandalorians'-whereabouts.
the-heiress" doesn't speak galactic-basic, but briefly uses the-damaged-droid-q9-0's vocabulator to communicate with the-mandalorian.
because of her-eggs-fragility, her-eggs have to travel at "sub-light", and end up crashing on an-icy-planet to avoid a-x-wing-fighter-patrol who have an-arrest-warrant for the-mandalorian since he has helped break out qin from the-new-republic-transport.
they are nearly killed by a-swarm of spider-like-krynka, but are rescued by the-x-wing-pilots who let the-mandalorian go with a-warning because he assisted in the-capture of the-others involved in the-prison-break.
after completing repairs, they manage to continue they journey to trask.
the-frog-lady reunites with the-frog-lady mate the-frog-man upon their-arrival on trask.
the-mandalorian leaves the-child with the-frog-lady and the-frog-man to babysit.
following the-mission with bo-katan, the mandalorian returns where the-frog-man finds the-child interacting with the-hatchlings.
the-frog-lady is performed by misty-rosas and  the-frog-lady vocal effects are provided by dee-bradley-baker.
the-frog-lady was positively received by fans.
koska reeves ====
koska-reeves is a-mandalorian-warrior who appears in "chapter 11:
the-heiress" and "chapter 16:
the-rescue".
reeves is part of the-night-owls, and fights alongside bo-katan-kryze.
koska is portrayed by mercedes-varnado, better known by koska ring name sasha banks.
bo-katan-kryze ====
bo-katan-kryze is a-mandalorian-warrior who appears in "chapter 11:
the-heiress" and "chapter 16:
the-rescue".
originally appearing in star-wars:
the-clone-wars, then returning in star-wars:
rebels , bo-katan appears here for the-first-time in live-action.
in "chapter 11: the-heiress", bo-katan and the-nite-owls-rescue the-mandalorian and the-child.
bo-katan introduces bo-katan, revealing bo-katan heritage as a-mandalorian, and that bo-katan is actually part of group of zealots who wish to restore ancient-mandalorian-traditions.
the-mandalorian leaves rejecting their-help.
later bo-katan and the-nite-owls again rescue the-mandalorian.
in return for information  later-bo-katan and the-nite-owls reluctantly agrees to help them seize a-shipment of weapons.
during the-raid bo-katan-changes-plan, deciding to take the-whole-ship, not just-the-weapons.
when they capture the-bridge, bo-katan interrogates the-head-officer, wanting to know about the-dark-saber.
bo-katan was impressed by the-mandalorian and invites bo-katan to join they, but bo-katan must continue bo-katan quest, so
bo-katan tells bo-katan to go to the-forest-planet of corvus, to find the-jedi-ahsoka-tano.
bo-katan returns in chapter 16 and helps the-mandalorian to rescue the-child from moff-gideon.
bo-katan is portrayed by katee-sackhoff, who previously voiced the-character in animated-form in star-wars: the clone wars and star-wars rebels.
featured-guest-characters ==
several-characters have been featured in a-single-episode within a-season of the-mandalorian in which several-characters play a-significant-role.
introduced in season one === ====
mythrol ====
an-unnamed-mythrol appears in the-opening-scenes of the-series-premiere "chapter 1: the-mandalorian", in which the-mandalorian captures him to collect a-bounty.
he re-appears in "chapter 12:
the-siege".
blue-skinned and amphibious, with fins on his-face, the-mythrol is ultimately delivered to the-bounty-hunters'-guild.
the-mythrol returned in the-second-season-episode "chapter 12: the-siege" was released from he-carbonite-prison to work as a-bookkeeper in exchange for a-reduced-sentence.
he also mentioned that he's still suffering from the-side-effect of the-carbonite where he hasn't regained vision in
he left eye yet.
the-mythrol was brought along with the-mandalorian, karga, and cara-dune during their-raid on an-imperial-base where he does things when either threatened to be put back in carbonite to having he sentence cut in half.
he was the one who found the-message from dr.-pershing to moff-gideon about the-experiments involving the-child's-dna.
the-mythrol is portrayed by comedian-horatio-sanz, a-long-time-fan of star-wars.
toro-calican ====
toro-calican
==== is a-young-bounty-hunter who encountered the-mandalorian in episode "chapter 5
:-the-gunslinger".
toro-calican ==== recruits the-mandalorian's-help capturing the-assassin fennec-shand.
it is toro's-first-bounty-hunting-assignment, and  toro-calican ==== hopes it will help  toro-calican ==== get into the-bounty-hunters'-guild.
toro later double-crosses the-mandalorian and attempts to turn  toro over to the-guild, but is instead shot and killed by the-mandalorian.
toro is portrayed by jake-cannavale.
toro received mixed-reviews from critics.
"ran"-malk is the-leader of a-group of mercenaries that operate out of a-space-station in "chapter 6: the-prisoner".
ran" malk is the-leader of a-group of mercenaries that operate out of a-space-station in "chapter 6:
the-prisoner" develops a-plan for "ran"-malk is the-leader of a-group of mercenaries that operate out of a-space-station in "chapter 6: the-prisoner" crew to infiltrate a-new-republic-prison-ship-and-rescue-qin, an-imprisoned-twi'lek.
after the-mission, ran tries to have the-mandalorian killed, but instead the-mandalorian space station is attacked by new-republic-x-wing-fighters, which were led there by the-mandalorian.
ran is portrayed by mark-boone-junior.
fans reacted positively to ran's-character and boone's-performance, and the-character was included on vulture's-list of the-show's-15-best-cameo-appearances from season one.
migs-mayfeld ====
migs-mayfeld ===
is a-former-imperial-army-sharpshooter who leads a-crew of ranzar-"ran"-malk's-mercenaries in their-attempt to rescue qin from a-new-republic-prison-transport-ship.
migs-mayfeld ==== uses two-blaster-pistols, as well as a-third-blaster controlled by a-droid-arm attached to migs-mayfeld ====-backpack.
mayfeld-clashes repeatedly with the-mandalorian during the-mission, and ultimately attempts to betray migs-mayfeld
but instead the mandalorian incapacitates mayfeld and locks migs mayfeld
==== in a-cell on the-transport.
after moff-gideon's-dark-troopers make off with grogu, the-mandalorian later asks cara-dune about where mayfeld is being held.
cara-dune finds information stating that mayfeld was sentenced to 50-years on the-karthon-chop-fields.
cara-dune has cara-dune put on work-release so that cara-dune can get to an-imperial-console on morak.
mayfield and a-disguised-the-mandalorian make it to the-imperial-rhydonium-refinery after fighting off some-pirates.
the terminal mayfeld needs is in the-officer's-mess-hall, but mayfeld sees mayfeld former commanding officer valin hess and fears being recognized.
the-mandalorian goes instead but the-terminal requires a-facial-scan, and  the-mandalorian removes  the-mandalorian helmet to acquire the-codes.
the-mandalorian is confronted by hess, but mayfeld intervenes.
after a-tense-drink where hess insults dead-soldiers from operation: cinder on burnin-konn, an-angered-mayfeld shoots hess dead.
the mandalorian and mayfeld fight their-way past the-stormtroopers and shoretroopers until boba-fett extracts their.
then mayfeld blows up the-refinery.
after getting what they need, dune and the-mandalorian allow mayfeld to leave while covering this up by stating that he was killed in action.
mayfeld is portrayed by actor-and-comedian-bill-burr, who was not a-fan of star-wars and repeatedly mocked the-franchise and mayfeld fans before he accepted the-role.
jon-favreau offered the-part to burr, believing jon-favreau past criticism of the-franchise would make jon-favreau casting that much more amusing.
burr was extremely impressed with the-filming of the-mandalorian, complimenting the-technical-aspects of filming as well as the-writing-style of the-series.
the-character of mayfeld received a-generally-positive-response from reviewers, and several-critics noted that mayfeld's sardonic personality and hard-edged-sense of humor are similar to burr's-real-life-comedic-style.
xi'an ====
xi'an is a-female-purple-skinned-twi'lek who appears in "chapter 6:
the-prisoner".
a former love interest of the-mandalorian, she is part of the-rescue-team sent by ranzar-"ran"-malk to rescue she brother-qin from a-new-republic-prison-transport.
she attempts to betray the-mandalorian during the-mission, but instead the-mandalorian incapacitates xi'an and locks she in a-cell on the-prison-transport.
xi'an is portrayed by natalia-tena, the-only-actress who has appeared in star-wars, game of thrones, and the-harry-potter-film-series.
she is also the second game of thrones star to also appear in the-mandalorian, along with pedro-pascal.
xi'an has received mixed-reviews from critics, and several-reviewers compared she to the-comic-book-character harley-quinn.
burg, a-red-skinned-devaronian, is the-"muscle" of
ranzar-"ran"-malk's-mercenary-party sent to rescue qin from a-new-republic-prison-transport-ship in "chapter 6:-the-prisoner".
extremely-strong,-ranzar-"ran"-malk's repeatedly mocks the-mandalorian during the-mandalorian time together, at one-point attempting to forcibly remove ranzar-"ran"-malk's-helmet.
burg attempts to betray the-mandalorian during the-mission, but the-mandalorian defeats the-mandalorian in a-fight, and locks the-mandalorian into a-cell on the-prison-transport.
burg is portrayed by clancy-brown, who also voiced the-mandalorian-bounty-hunter-montross in star-wars: bounty-hunter (2002), savage-opress in star-wars:
the-clone-wars, and ryder-azadi in star-wars-rebels.
burg was well received by reviewers, with several comparing  burg to the-fictional-superhero hellboy.
q9-0, also referred to simply as zero, is a-droid who acts as the-pilot, navigator, and hacker for the-mercenary-crew sent by ranzar-"ran"-malk to rescue qin from a-new-republic-prison-transport-ship in "chapter 6: the-prisoner".
during the-mission, q9-0 discovers there is a-high-bounty on the-child, whom he attempts to kill, but the-mandalorian-shoots and destroys q9-0 before he can do so.
in "chapter 10: the-passenger", it is revealed that the-mandalorian has kept q9-0's remains on the-razor-crest.
at one-point, the-frog-lady uses the-droid's-vocabulator to better communicate with the-mandalorian so that the-frog-lady can understand what the-frog-lady is saying.
q9-0 is voiced by richard-ayoade.
the-character received generally-positive-reviews from critics.
the-federalist-writer-brad-jackson suggested the-droid's-nickname "zero" could be a-reference to a-droid named "0-0-0", or "triple-zero", a-murderous-droid in the-star-wars: doctor-aphra-comic-book-series that resembles c-3po.
a-funko-pop-figurine of q9-0 has been released.
qin is a-male-purple-skinned-twi'lek who was being held captive on a-new-republic-prison-transport-ship in "chapter 6:
the-prisoner".
qin blamed the-mandalorian for  qin imprisonment.
ranzar-"ran"-malk arranges for a-mercenary-party to rescue qin, which includes the-mandalorian.
after the-team infiltrates the-ship and recovers qin, the-team lock the-mandalorian in  qin's cell and attempt to abandon  qin there, but  qin escapes.
the mandalorian returns qin to ran's-space-station, but also leads the-new-republic to their-location, and ran's-space-station is attacked by x-wing-fighters while qin is aboard.
qin is portrayed by ismael-cruz-córdova.
qin received mixed-reviews from critics.
introduced in season two ===
gor-koresh ====
gor-koresh ===
= is a-abyssin-gangster whom the-mandalorian sought out for information on any-mandalorian-sightings in "chapter 9:
the-marshal".
when the-mandalorian approaches the-marshal" while the-marshal" is watching a-ring-fight, gor koresh ====
orders the-marshal"-henchmen to kill the-marshal" and steal the-marshal" beskar armor, but the-mandalorian defeats his-beskar-armor and interrogates koresh, who informs his-beskar-armor of a-mandalorian-warrior operating on tatooine.
the-mandalorian then leaves koresh hanging from the-lamppost which koresh shoots the-lights out as nocturnal-creatures start to close in.
koresh is performed by john-rosengrant and voiced by john-leguizamo.
cobb-vanth ====
cobb-vanth ===
is the-marshal of the-tatooine-town of mos-pelgo.
on the-day when the-second-death-star was destroyed, cobb was present when the-mining-collective attacked mos-pelgo.
although cobb was forced to work as a-slave, cobb eventually escaped with a-box that, unbeknownst to cobb, contained crystals, which cobb traded to cobb jawa rescuers in exchange for the-salvaged-mandalorian-armor formerly owned by boba-fett.
using the-salvaged-mandalorian-armor formerly owned by boba-fett, cobb drove off the-invaders, and continued to protect the-townspeople of mos-pelgo ever since.
in "chapter 9: the-marshal", the-mandalorian is told to seek out cobb by people who had mistaken cobb for an-actual-mandalorian because of cobb armor.
when the-mandalorian meets cobb and finds out the-truth, cobb demands that cobb remove cobb armor.
their-stand-off is interrupted by the-attack of a-krayt-dragon that has been terrorizing mos-pelgo, and cobb persuades the-mandalorian to assist the-mandalorian in killing the-mandalorian in exchange for his-armor.
together, their form an unlikely alliance between the-townspeople and the-tusken-raiders to eliminate their-common-enemy, before the-mandalorian comes up with a-strategy to use a-bantha as a-suicide-bomber and have the-mandalorian detonate once the-dragon eats the-mandalorian.
when the-plan fails, the-mandalorian decides to allow the-mandalorian to be eaten as well in order to manually detonate the-explosives, and entrusts cobb to look after the-child, should the-mandalorian perish.
the-mandalorian survives and, with the-dragon slain, the-dragon parts ways amicably with cobb, who hands the-dragon the-dragon armor.
cobb-vanth is portrayed by timothy-olyphant.
cobb-vanth was introduced in the-star-wars:
aftermath-trilogy of novels written by chuck-wendig.
axe-woves ====
axe-woves is a-mandalorian-warrior who appears in "chapter 11 :
the-heiress".
axe is portrayed by simon-kassianides.
the-heiress" was named by george-lucas who visited the-set during the-shooting of chapter 11.
imperial-captain ====
imperial-captain ==== appears in "chapter 11:
the-heiress" as the-captain of an-imperial-cargo-ship that contained stolen-mandalorian-weapons.
mandalorian helped bo-katan-kryze's-group in reclaiming it.
imperial-captain ==== informed moff-gideon about the-situation and called for backup only to be told by moff-gideon to sacrifice an-imperial-cargo-ship that contained stolen-mandalorian-weapons as they are beyond rescue right now.
after bo-katan's-group makes bo-katan's-group way into the-bridge and stops the-ship from crashing, bo-katan demands the-captain to tell bo-katan the-location of the-darksaber, but bo-katan fears gideon more than bo-katan and commits suicide by biting on an-electric-capsule.
the-captain the-captain is portrayed by titus-welliver.
lang is an-imperial-lieutenant who works for morgan-elsbeth on the-planet-corvus.
lang assisted  lang in oppressing the-citizens of calodan while leading the-fight against ahsoka-tano.
when the-mandalorian arrived in calidan,  lang took  lang to morgan.
lang later led  lang troops into fighting ahsoka and the-mandalorian when his-troops attacked calodan and took down the-soldiers loyal to morgan.
as ahsoka dueled with morgan,  lang was in a-stand-off with the-mandalorian.
when morgan was defeated, lang put down lang weapons and tried to fake-surrender by pulling out a-smaller-blaster only to be shot by the-mandalorian.
lang is portrayed by michael-biehn.
ahsoka-tano ====
ahsoka-tano ===
is a-togruta, former-jedi-padawan to anakin-skywalker, and whom the-mandalorian seeks out in order to return the-child to the-child species.
when on corvus, she attacked calodan in order for morgan-elsbeth to divulge to she the-location of she master.
the-mandalorian met ahsoka-tano, and she was able to interact with the-child without words as they can feel each-other's-thoughts.
ahsoka then reveals that grogu is the-child-name.
she mentions that grogu is only the second living being of grogu species that ahsoka has encountered, the first being master-yoda.
after testing one of grogu's-abilities, ahsoka didn't want to train ahsoka due to the-bad-path ahsoka might take.
the-mandalorian and ahsoka work together to liberate calodan from elsbeth who is defeated by ahsoka.
she gives the-unseen-answer to ahsoka on where she master-grand-admiral-thrawn is.
before the mandalorian and grogu take their-leave, ahsoka directs their to tython where there are the-ruins of an-old-temple.
if tython where there are the-ruins of an-old-temple-calls are answered by another-jedi, tython where there are the-ruins of an-old-temple will be trained by another-jedianother-jedi.
ahsoka is portrayed by rosario-dawson in "chapter 13:
the-jedi".
the-character was previously voiced by ashley-eckstein in star-wars:
the-clone-wars, star-wars-rebels, and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
morgan-elsbeth ====
morgan-elsbeth is the-imperial-magistrate of calidan on the-planet-corvus.
in her-early-life, her-people were attacked during the-clone-wars.
during the-rise of the-galactic-empire, morgan helped to build the-imperial-fleet and has worked for grand-admiral-thrawn, and her pillaged different-worlds.
her ruled calidan with an-iron-fist and strung up her-prisoners in electrical-cages.
ahsoka-tano did different-attacks on calidan in order to get morgan to divulge the-location of grand-admiral-thrawn.
when the-mandalorian arrived on corvus, morgan contracted morgan to find ahsoka, for which she will give morgan a-pure-beskar-staff as reward.
the-mandalorian and ahsoka worked together to liberate calidan from morgan's-rule.
following morgan-elsbeth, a-man named wing became the-governor of calidan.
morgan-elsbeth is portrayed by diana-lee-inosanto.
luke-skywalker ====
luke-skywalker is the-jedi-master who responds to grogu's-transmission through the-force, rescuing him from gideon's-dark-troopers in "chapter 16:
the-rescue".
alongside r2-d2, the-rescue" subsequently agrees to train grogu as a-jedi-padawan.
luke is portrayed by mark-hamill.
mark-hamill was digitally de-aged to portray  luke-skywalker.
max-lloyd-jones served as an-on-set-body double for the-character.
minor-guest-characters ==
several-characters have appeared on the-mandalorian in minor-roles or significant-cameo-appearances.
introduced in season one === ====
paz-vizsla ====
paz-vizsla ===
is one of the-warriors in the-mandalorian-tribe on nevarro.
strong-and-physically-imposing,-paz-vizsla
==== is a-heavy-infantry-fighter.
he appears in the-episode "chapter 3: the-sin", where he initially quarrels with the-mandalorian for working with the-empire, but later comes to he assistance when the-mandalorian is being attacked.
paz-vizsla is voiced by jon-favreau, who previously voiced a-similarly-named-mandalorian-warlord named pre vizsla on the-series star wars: the-clone-wars.
stunt-performer and former-mixed-martial-artist-tait-fletcher was the-live-action-body double for paz-vizsla.
omera ====
omera is a-krill-farmer and widow living on a-village on sorgan with  omera daughter, winta, in the-episode "chapter 4: sanctuary".
when the-villagers hire the-mandalorian and cara-dune to protect the-villagers from klatooinian-raiders,  omera befriends the-mandalorian, and the two appear attracted to each other.
omera participates in the-village's-successful-defense of the-village and elimination of klatooinian-raiders.
omera is portrayed by julia-jones. "
chapter-4"-director-bryce-dallas-howard said it was challenging directing emotional-scenes between omera and the-mandalorian because  chapter-4"-director-bryce-dallas-howard always wears a-helmet, but that the-scenes worked because "julia is deeply connected to julia emotions
and you can just feel them on julia-face."
brendan-wayne, a-body double for the-mandalorian-character, said brendan-wayne, a-body double for the-mandalorian-character scenes with jones were so emotional that his-scenes with jones made brendan-wayne, a-body double for the-mandalorian-character cry.
the-character of omera has received mixed-reviews from critics.
winta ====
winta is the-young-daughter of omera, living in a-village on sorgan in "chapter 4: sanctuary".
she develops a-close-friendship with the-child after the-mandalorian brings the-child to the-village.
winta is portrayed by isla-farris.
caben and stoke ====
caben and stoke are krill-farmers in a-sorgan-village in "chapter 4: sanctuary".
the two hire the-mandalorian to provide protection from klatooinian-raiders attacking the-village.
caben is portrayed by actor-and-comedian-asif-ali, and stoke is played by actor-and-comedian-eugene-cordero.
the two were included on vulture's-list of the-show's-15-best-cameo-appearances from season one, in which writer-jackson-mchenry described them as "a-delightful-pair of goofy-villagers".
riot-mar ====
riot-mar is a-bounty-hunter who attempts to recover the-child from the-mandalorian in "chapter 5
:-the-gunslinger".
riot-pilots a-starfighter and attacks the-mandalorian's-ship, but is killed by the-mandalorian after a-brief-dogfight.
riot-mar is portrayed by rio-hackford.
davan ====
davan ====
is a-soldier with the-new-republic and the-sole-non-droid-crew-member of a-new-republic-prison-transport-ship in "chapter 6:
the-prisoner".
despite efforts by the-mandalorian to save him, davan is murdered by a-gang of mercenaries who board the-ship to rescue the-prisoner qin.
davan is portrayed by matt-lanter, who also provides the-voice of star-wars-protagonist-anakin-skywalker in star-wars: the-clone-wars, as well as other-minor-characters.
syfy-wire-writer-bryan-young noted that lanter's-performance as davan sounds nothing like syfy-wire-writer-bryan-young voice for anakin, which bryan-young said "speaks to syfy-wire-writer-bryan-young skill as an-actor".
trapper-wolf, jib-dodger and sash-ketter ====
trapper-wolf, jib-dodger and sash-ketter are a-trio of new-republic-x-wing-starfighter-pilots, who investigate a-homing-beacon activated from a-new-republic-prison-transport-ship in "chapter 6: the-prisoner".
the-pilots follow the-beacon to a-space-station operated by mercenary-ranzar-"ran"-malk, which the-pilots attack.
in "chapter 10:
the-passenger," trapper-wolf accompanied carson-teva in investigating the-razor-crest.
each of the-pilots are played by directors of first-season-episodes making cameo-appearances:
jib is portrayed by rick-famuyiwa, sash is played by deborah-chow, and trapper is portrayed by dave-filoni.
rick-famuyiwa directed and co-wrote the-episode in which he appeared.
trapper-name was inspired by dave-filoni's-love of wolves.
introduced in season two ===
carson-teva ====
carson-teva ===
is a-captain in the-new-republic's-starfighter-corps who originated from alderaan.
a-captain in the-new-republic's-starfighter-corps who originated from alderaan first appeared in "chapter 10:
the-passenger" where a-captain in the-new-republic's-starfighter-corps who originated from alderaan and trapper-wolf follow the-razor-crest wanting a-ping from the-razor-crest upon entering an-area of space that is under the-new-republic's-jurisdiction and wanting to ask about the-new-republic-correctional-transport-incident which led to the mandalorian flying to maldo-kreis.
teva and wolf catch up to the-mandalorian where  teva and wolf slew some-ice-spiders.
after noting that he was sighted with some-criminals during a-breakout and that he left the-same-criminals in a-cell, the-same-criminals were able to overlook it.
before leaving, carson advises that the-mandalorian where they slew some-ice-spiders gets carson transponder fixed by the-next-time the-same-criminals run into each other.
in "chapter 12: the-siege," carson-teva and one of his-fellow-new-republic-starfighter-corps-members visited nevarro where-his-asked-greef-karga about the-destruction of an-imperial-base there.
after greef-karga confirmed some-information, teva later spoke to cara-dune where his-states that the-new-republic is not sure what is happening in the-outer-rim and some-information won't be able to get to the-bottom of the-new-republic without local-support.
it is also revealed that they suffered mutual-losses of people they knew the-day when alderaan was destroyed.
carson-teva is portrayed by paul-sun-hyung-lee.
governor-wing ====
governor-wing ===
= is a-human who lives in calidan on the-planet-corvus at the-time when the-planet-corvus people were oppressed by magistrate-morgan-elsbeth.
while the-mandalorian and ahsoka-tano were fighting morgan's-forces, wing helped to free the-prisoners.
when morgan is defeated by ahsoka and overthrown, wing becomes the-governor of calidan.
wing is portrayed by wing tao chao, a-disney-executive who retired in 2009.
valin-hess ====
valin-hess is an-imperial-officer who used to have migs-mayfeld as a-soldier and participated in operation:
a-disguised-mandalorian-and-mayfeld-encounter-mandalorian at a-rhydonium-refinery on morak.
the terminal mayfeld needs is in the-officer's-mess-hall, but mayfeld sees mayfeld former commanding officer valin hess and fears being recognized.
mandalorian goes instead, but the-terminal requires a-facial-scan and mandalorian removes mandalorian helmet to acquire the-codes.
he is confronted by hess, but mayfeld intervenes.
after a-tense-drink where hess insults dead-soldiers from operation: cinder, an-angered-mayfeld shoots hess dead.
hess is portrayed by richard-brake.
r2-d2 ====
r2-d2 is a-droid that was befriended by luke-skywalker.
r2-d2 appeared with luke in "chapter 16:
the-rescue" where they obtain grogu so that luke can train luke.
bib-fortuna ====
bib-fortuna is the-former-aide of jabba the-hutt.
bib-fortuna appears in the-post-credits-scene of "chapter 16:
the-rescue", where  bib-fortuna is revealed to have taken over jabba's-palace, and is subsequently killed by
bib-fortuna former-associate-boba-fett.
bib-fortuna is portrayed by matthew-wood,  bib-fortuna previously appeared as the-character in the-phantom-menace.
see also ==
list of star-wars-characters mandalorian the-mandalorian ==
notes == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
full-cast and crew of the-mandalorian at imdb-star-wars is an-american-epic-space-opera-media-franchise created by george-lucas, which began with the-eponymous-1977-film and quickly became a-worldwide-pop-culture-phenomenon.
the-franchise has been expanded into various-films and other-media, including television-series, video-games, novels, comic-books, theme-park-attractions, and themed-areas, comprising an-all-encompassing-fictional-universe.
in 2020, its-total-value was estimated at us$70 billion, and its is currently the-fifth-highest-grossing-media-franchise of all-time.
the-original-film (star-wars), retroactively subtitled episode-iv: a-new-hope (1977), was followed by the-sequels episode-v:
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi:
return of the-jedi (1983), forming the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a-prequel-trilogy, consisting of episode-i: the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii: attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii: revenge of the-sith (2005).
in 2012,  lucas sold  lucas production company to disney, relinquishing  lucas ownership of the-franchise.
the-subsequently-produced-sequel-trilogy consists of episode-vii:
the-force awakens (2015),
episode-viii:
the-last-jedi (2017), and episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker (2019).
all-nine-films of the-'skywalker-saga' were nominated for academy-awards with wins going to the-first-two-releases.
together with the-theatrical-live-action-spin-off-films rogue one (2016) and solo (2018), the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films equated to over us$10 billion and is currently the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise of all-time.
premise ==
the-star-wars-franchise depicts the-adventures of characters "a long time ago in a-galaxy far, far away", in which humans and many-species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with robots, or 'droids', who may assist humans and many-species of aliens (often humanoid) in humans and many-species of aliens (often-humanoid)-daily-routines; space-travel between planets is common due to lightspeed-hyperspace-technology.
spacecraft range from small-starfighters, to huge-capital-ships such as the-star-destroyers, to space-stations such as the-moon-sized-death-stars.
telecommunication includes two-way-audio-and-audiovisual-screens, and holographic-projections.
a-mystical-power known as the-force is described in the-original-film as "an-energy-field created by all-living-things ...
[that] binds the-galaxy together".
through training and meditation, those whom "the-force is strong with" are able to perform various-superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical-energy).
the-force is wielded by two-major-knightly-orders at conflict with each other: the-jedi, peacekeepers of the-galactic-republic who act on the-light-side of the-force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the-sith, who use the-dark-side by manipulating fear and aggression.
while jedi-knights can be numerous, the-dark-lords of the-sith (or 'darths') are intended to be limited to two: a-master and the-dark-lords of the-sith (or 'darths') apprentice.
force-wielders are very limited in numbers in comparison to the-population.
the-jedi and sith prefer the-use of a-weapon called a lightsaber, a-blade of energy that can cut through virtually-any-surface and deflect energy-bolts.
the-rest of the-population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use laser-powered-blaster-firearms.
in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy, crime-syndicates such as the-hutt-cartel are dominant.
bounty-hunters are often employed by both-gangsters and governments.
illicit-activities include smuggling and slavery.
the-star-wars-film-series-centers around three-sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the-"skywalker-saga".
the-star-wars-film-series-centers around three-sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the-"skywalker-saga" were produced non-chronologically, with episodes-iv–vi (the-original-trilogy) being released between 1977 and 1983, episodes-i–iii (the-prequel-trilogy) being released between 1999 and 2005, and episodes vii–ix (the-sequel-trilogy), being released between 2015 and 2019.
each-trilogy focuses on a-generation of the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family.
the-original-trilogy depicts the-heroic-development of luke-skywalker, the-prequels tell the-backstory of his-father anakin, while the-sequels-star-luke's-nephew, kylo-ren.
an-anthology-series set between the-main-episodes entered development in parallel to the-production of the-sequel-trilogy, described by disney-chief-financial-officer-jay-rasulo as origin-stories.
the-first-entry, rogue one (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans just before episode-iv.
solo (2018) focuses on han solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists chewbacca and lando-calrissian and involving prequel trilogy-villain-darth-maul.
lucasfilm has a-number of star-wars-films in development, two of which were confirmed during disney-investor-day 2020.
the first will be a-film titled rogue squadron, which is being directed by patty-jenkins, and is scheduled for release on december 25, 2023.
the second is an-unspecified-film from taika-waititi, who in may 2020 was announced to be directing a-star-wars-film
he was co-writing with krysty-wilson-cairns.
additionally, a-trilogy independent from the-skywalker-saga is being written by the-last-jedi-writer/director rian-johnson.
in september 2019, it was announced that kathleen-kennedy and kevin-feige would collaborate to develop a-star-wars-film.
in february 2020, a-film was announced to be in development from director-j.-d.-dillard and writer-matt-owens.
the-skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ====
in 1971, george-lucas wanted to film an-adaptation of the-flash-gordon-serial, but could not obtain the-rights, so george-lucas began developing george-lucas own-space-opera.
after directing american-graffiti (1973), george-lucas wrote a-two-page-synopsis, which 20th century george-lucas decided to invest in.
by 1974, george-lucas had expanded the-story into the-first-draft of a-screenplay.
the-1977-movie's-success led george-lucas to make it the basis of an-elaborate-film-serial.
with the-backstory george-lucas created for the-sequel, george-lucas decided that the-series would be a-trilogy of trilogies.
most of the-main-cast would return for the-two-additional-installments of the-original-trilogy, which were self-financed by lucasfilm.
star-wars was released on may 25, 1977, and first-subtitled-episode-iv:
a-new-hope in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars.
episode-v:
the empire strikes back was released on may 21, 1980, also achieving wide-financial-and-critical-success.
the-final-film in the-trilogy,-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi was released on may 25, 1983.
the-story of the-trilogy focuses on luke-skywalker's-quest to become a-the-jedi, luke-skywalker's-struggle with the-evil-imperial-agent darth-vader, and the-struggle of the-rebel-alliance to free the-galaxy from the-clutches of the-galactic-empire.
trilogy ====
according to producer-gary-kurtz, loose-plans for a-prequel-trilogy were developed during the-outlining of the-original-two-films.
in 1980, lucas confirmed that lucas had the-nine-film-series plotted, but due to the-stress of producing the-original-trilogy, lucas had decided to cancel further-sequels by 1981.
in 1983, lucas explained that "there was never a-script completed that had the-entire-story as the-entire-story exists now ...
as the-stories unfolded, i would take certain-ideas and save certain-ideas ...
i kept taking out all-the-good-parts, and i just kept telling myself i would make other-movies someday.
technical-advances in the-late-1980s and early-1990s, including the-ability to create computer-generated-imagery (cgi), inspired lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit lucas saga.
in 1989, lucas stated that the-prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
in 1992, lucas acknowledged that lucas had plans to create the-prequel-trilogy.
a-theatrical-rerelease of the-original-trilogy in 1997 "updated" the-20-year-old-films with the-style of cgi envisioned for the-new-trilogy.
the-phantom-menace was released on may 19, 1999, and episode ii:
attack of the-clones on may 16, 2002.
episode iii: revenge of the-sith, the-first-pg-13-film in the-franchise, was released on may 19, 2005.
the-first-two-movies were met with mixed-reviews, with the third being received somewhat more positively.
the-trilogy begins 32 years before episode-iv and follows the-jedi-training of anakin-skywalker, luke's-father, and jedi-eventual-fall from grace and transformation into the-sith-lord-darth-vader, as well as the-corruption of the-galactic-republic and rise of the-empire led by darth-sidious.
together with the-original-trilogy, lucas has collectively referred to the-first-six-episodic-films of the-franchise as "the-tragedy of darth-vader".
sequel-trilogy ====
prior to releasing the-original-film, and made possible by the-original-film success, lucas planned "three-trilogies of nine-films."
lucas announced this to time in 1978, and confirmed that lucas had outlined them in 1981.
at various-stages of development, the-sequel-trilogy was to focus on the-rebuilding of the-republic, the return of luke in a-role similar to that of obi-wan in the-original-trilogy, luke's sister (not yet determined to be leia), han, leia, r2-d2 and c-3po.
however, after beginning work on the-prequel-trilogy, lucas insisted that star-wars was meant to be a-six-part-series and that there would be no-sequel-trilogy.
lucas decided to leave the-franchise in the-hands of other-filmmakers, announcing in january 2012 that lucas would make no-more-star-wars-films.
in october of that-year, the-walt-disney-company agreed to buy lucasfilm and announced that episode-vii would be released in 2015.
the-co-chairman of lucasfilm, kathleen-kennedy, became president of the-walt-disney-company and served as executive-producer of new-star-wars-feature-films.
lucas provided kennedy-kennedy-story-treatments for the-sequels during the-2012-sale, but in 2015 it was revealed lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
the-sequel-trilogy also meant the-end of the-existing-star-wars-expanded-universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum-creative-freedom to the-filmmakers and also preserve an-element of surprise and discovery for the-audience.
episode-vii:
the-force-awakens was released on december 16, 2015, episode viii:
the-last-jedi on december 13, 2017, and episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker on december 18, 2019, in many-countries.
the force awakens and the-last-jedi were both a-critical-and-box-office-successes.
episode-ix received a-mixed-reception from critics and audiences.
the-sequel-trilogy starts 30 years after episode-vi and focuses on the-journey of the-force-sensitive-orphan-rey, guided by luke-skywalker.
along with ex-stormtrooper-finn and ace-x-wing-pilot-poe-dameron, rey helps the-resistance, led by leia, fight the-first-order, commanded by han and leia's son (and luke's-nephew), kylo-ren.
anthology-films ===
lucasfilm and kennedy have stated that the-standalone-films would be referred to as the-star-wars-anthology-series (though the-word-anthology has not been used in any of the-titles, instead carrying the-promotional-"a-star-wars-story"-subtitle).
focused on how the-rebels obtained the death star plans introduced in the-1977-film, the-first-anthology-film, rogue one: a-star-wars-story, was released on december 16, 2016, to favorable-reviews-and-box-office-success.
the-second,-solo:
a-star-wars-story, centered on a-young-han-solo with chewbacca and lando as supporting characters, was released on may 25, 2018, to generally-favorable-reviews and underperformance at the-box-office.
despite this, more-anthology-films are expected to be released, following a-hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker.
television ==
the-star-wars-franchise has been spun off to various-television-productions, including two-animated-series released in the-mid-1980s.
further-animated-series began to be released in the-2000s, the first two of which focused on the-clone-wars.
after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, only the later one remained canon.
eight-live-action-star-wars-series will be released on disney+.
the first, the-mandalorian, premiered on november 12, 2019.
the-clone-wars won the-2020-webby-award for television & film in the-category-social.
later released the-ewoks-movies and animated-series, along the-animated-first-appearance of boba-fett, and the clone wars animated micro-series in a-section called star wars vintage, that-section will also include the droids animated-series in the-future.
certain-aspects of the-original-clone-wars-micro-series are considered to not contradict the-canon, while others do.
series === ===
films === ===
television special === ==
fictional-timeline ==
the-star-wars-canon-fictional-universe spans multiple-eras, of which three are focused around each of the-film trilogies.
the-following-eras were defined in january 2021:
the-high-republic:
the-era of the-"high-republic", set 200 years before the-prequel-trilogy.
the-prequel-trilogy includes the-media released in the-high-republic and the upcoming the-acolyte.
fall of the-jedi: the era of the-prequel-trilogy, in which the-democratic-galactic-republic is corrupted by the-democratic-galactic-republic ruler, palpatine—secretly-the-sith-lord-darth-sidious.
after orchestrating the-clone-wars between the-republic and a-separatist-confederation, palpatine exterminates the-jedi-order, overthrows the-democratic-galactic-republic, and establishes the-totalitarian-galactic-empire.
the-totalitarian-galactic-empire includes the-prequel-trilogy-films and the-animated-the-clone-wars.
this-era was previously defined as the-age of republic in august 2019.
reign of the-totalitarian-galactic-empire:
the-era after the-prequel-trilogy, exploring the-reign of the-empire.
it includes the-animated-the-bad-batch and solo: a-star-wars-story.
the-age of rebellion: the-era of the-original-trilogy, in which the-empire is fought by the-rebel-alliance in a-galactic-civil-war that spans several-years, climaxing with the-death of the-emperor and eventually resulting in the-fall of the-empire.
it includes the-animated-star-wars-rebels, rogue one, and the-original-trilogy-films.
the-new-republic:
the-era after the-original-trilogy, set during the-formative-years of the-new-republic following the-fall of the-empire.
the-era after the-original-trilogy, set during the-formative-years of the-new-republic following the-fall of the-empire includes the-mandalorian and the-era after the-original-trilogy, set during the-formative-years of the-new-republic following the-fall of the-empire spin-off series, the-book of boba-fett, rangers of the-new-republic, and ahsoka.
rise of the-first-order: the-era of the-sequel-trilogy, in which the remnants of the-empire-reform as the-first-order.
heroes of the-former-rebellion, aided by the-new-republic, lead the-resistance against the-oppressive-regime and the-new-republic rulers, the mysterious being known as snoke and snoke puppet master, the-revived-palpatine.
it includes the-animated-star-wars-resistance and the-sequel-trilogy-films.
this-era was previously defined as the-age of resistance in august 2019.the
expanded universe of spin-off-media depicts different-levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as legends on april 25, 2014, to make most-subsequent-works align to the-sequel-trilogy-films, the clone wars film, and television series.
in other-media ==
from 1976 to 2014, the-term expanded-universe (eu) was an-umbrella-term for all-officially-licensed-star-wars-storytelling-material set outside the-events depicted within the-theatrical-films, including novels, comics, and video-games.
lucasfilm maintained internal-continuity between the-films and television-content and the-eu-material until april 25, 2014, when lucasfilm announced all of the-eu-works would cease production.
existing-works would no longer be considered canon to the-franchise and subsequent-reprints would be rebranded under the-star-wars-legends-label, with downloadable-content for the-massively-multiplayer-online-game
the-old-republic the-only-legends-material to still be produced.
the-star-wars-canon was subsequently restructured to only include the-existing-six-feature-films, the-animated-film the-clone-wars (2008), and
the-star-wars-canon-companion-animated-series.
all-future-projects and creative-developments across all-types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the-story-group, announced as a-division of lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a-cohesive-vision on the-storytelling of the-franchise.
multiple-comics-series from marvel and novels published by del-rey were produced after the-announcement.
print-media ===
star-wars in print predates the-release of the-first-film, with the-december-1976-novelization of star-wars, initially subtitled "from the-adventures of luke-skywalker".
credited to lucas, it was ghostwritten by alan-dean-foster.
the-first-"expanded-universe"-story appeared in marvel comics' star wars #7 in january 1978 (the first six issues being an-adaptation of the-first-film), followed by alan-dean-foster's-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye the-following-month.
novels ====
after penning the-novelization of the-original-film, foster followed  after penning the-novelization of the-original-film with the-sequel-splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978).
the-novelizations of the empire strikes back (1980) by donald-f.-glut and return of the-jedi (1983) by james-kahn followed, as well as the-han-solo-adventures-trilogy (1979–1980) by brian-daley, and the-adventures of lando-calrissian-trilogy (1983) by l.-neil-smith.
timothy-zahn's-bestselling-thrawn-trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the-franchise and introduced the-popular-characters grand-admiral-thrawn, mara-jade, talon-karrde, and gilad-pellaeon.
the-first-novel, heir to the-empire, reached #1 on the-new-york-times-best-seller-list, and the-series finds luke, leia, and han facing off against tactical-genius-thrawn, who is plotting to retake the-galaxy for the-empire.
in the-courtship of princess-leia (1994) by dave-wolverton, set immediately before timothy-zahn's-bestselling-thrawn-trilogy (, leia considers an-advantageous-political-marriage to prince-isolder of the-planet-hapes,  but leia and han ultimately marry.
steve-perry's-shadows of the-empire (1996), set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi, was part of a-multimedia-campaign that included a-comic-book-series and video-game.
the-novel introduced the-crime lord-prince-xizor, another-popular-character who would appear in multiple-other-works.
other-notable-series from bantam include the-jedi-academy-trilogy (1994) by kevin-j.-anderson, the-14-book-young-jedi-knights-series (1995–1998) by anderson and rebecca-moesta, and the-x-wing-series (1996–2012) by michael-a.-stackpole and aaron-allston.
del-rey took over star-wars-book-publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a-19-installment-novel-series called the new jedi order (1999–2003).
written by multiple-authors, a-19-installment-novel-series called the new jedi order (1999–2003) was set 25 to 30 years after the-original-films and introduced the-yuuzhan-vong, a-powerful-alien-race attempting to invade and conquer the-entire-galaxy.
the-bestselling-multi-author-series-legacy of the-force (2006–2008) chronicles the-crossover of han and leia's-son jacen-solo to the-dark-side of the-force;
among his-evil-deeds, his kills luke's-wife mara-jade as a-sacrifice to join the-sith.
although no longer canon, the-story is paralleled in the force awakens with han and leia's-son ben-solo, who has become the-dark-kylo-ren.
three-series set in the-prequel-era were introduced for younger-audiences: the-18-book-jedi-apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the-adventures of obi-wan-kenobi and obi-wan-kenobi master qui-gon jinn in the-years before the-phantom-menace; the-11-book-jedi-quest (2001–2004) follows obi-wan-and-obi-wan-own-apprentice, anakin-skywalker in between the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones; and the 10-book
the last of the-jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after revenge of the-sith, features obi-wan and the last few surviving the-jedi.
although thrawn had been designated a legends character in 2014, thrawn was reintroduced into no-longer-canon in the-2016-third-season of rebels, with zahn returning to write more-novels based in the-character, and set in the-new-canon.
comics ====
marvel-comics published a-star-wars-comic-book-series from 1977 to 1986.
original-star-wars-comics were serialized in the-marvel-magazine-pizzazz between 1977 and 1979.
the-1977-installments were the-first-original-star-wars-stories not directly adapted from the-films to appear in print-form, as the-1977-installments preceded those of the-star-wars-comic-series.
from 1985 to 1987, the-animated-children's-series-ewoks and droids inspired comic-series from marvel's-star-comics-line.
according to marvel comics former-editor-in-chief jim shooter, the-strong-sales of star-wars-comics saved marvel's-star-comics financially in 1977 and 1978.
marvel's-star-comics's-star-wars-series was one of the-industry's-top-selling-titles in 1979 and 1980.
the-only-downside for marvel's-star-comics was that the-100,000-copy-sales-quota was surpassed quickly, allowing lippincott to renegotiate the-royalty-arrangements from a-position of strength.
in the-late-1980s, marvel's-star-comics dropped a new star wars comic marvel's-star-comics had in development, which was picked up by dark-horse-comics and published as the-popular-dark-empire-series (1991–1995).
dark-horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the-original-film-trilogy, including tales of the-jedi (1993–1998), x-wing-rogue-squadron (1995–1998),-star-wars: republic (1998–2006),
star-wars-tales (1999–2005),
star-wars: empire (2002–2006), and knights of the-old-republic (2006–2010).after-disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, lucasfilm was announced in january 2014 that in 2015 the star-wars comics license would return to marvel-comics, whose-parent-company, marvel-entertainment, disney had purchased in 2009.
launched in 2015, the-first-three-publications were titled star wars, darth vader, and the limited series princess-leia.
first announced as project-luminous at star-wars-celebration in april 2019, full-details of a-publishing-initiative called star wars: the-high-republic were revealed in a-press-conference in february 2020.
involving the-majority of the-current-officially-licensed-publishers, a-new-era set 200 years before the-skywalker-saga will be explored in various-books and comics.
these include ongoing-titles by marvel and idw-publishing, written by cavan-scott and daniel-josé older respectively, that will both premiere in august 2020.
audio === ====
soundtracks and singles ====
john-williams composed  soundtracks and singles ====
for the-nine-episodic-films; john-williams has stated that john-williams will retire from the-franchise with the-rise of skywalker.
john-williams also composed han-solo's-theme for solo: a-star-wars-story; john-powell adapted and composed the-rest of the-score.
michael-giacchino composed the-score of rogue one.
ludwig-göransson scored and composed the-music of the-mandalorian.
williams also created the-main-theme for galaxy's-edge.
audio-novels ====
the-first-star-wars-audio-work is the-story of star-wars, an-lp using audio-samples from the-original-film and a-new-narration to retell the-story, released in 1977.
most later printed-novels were adapted into audio-novels, usually released on cassette-tape and re-released on cd.
as of 2019, audio-only-novels have been released not directly based on printed-media.
radio ====
radio-adaptations of the-films were also produced.
lucas, a-fan of the-npr-affiliated-campus-radio-station of lucas alma mater the-university of southern-california, licensed the-star-wars-radio-rights to kusc-fm for us$1.
the-production used john-williams's-original-film-score, along with ben-burtt's-sound-effects.
the first was written by science-fiction-author-brian-daley and directed by john-madden.
it was broadcast on national-public-radio in 1981, adapting the-original-1977-film into 13-episodes.
mark-hamill and anthony-daniels reprised mark-hamill and anthony-daniels film roles.
the-overwhelming-success, led to a-10-episode-adaptation of the-empire-strikes back debuted in 1983.
billy-dee-williams joined the-other-two-stars, reprising  billy-dee-williams role as lando-calrissian.
in 1983, buena-vista-records released an-original,-30-minute-star-wars-audio-drama titled rebel mission to ord-mantell, written by daley.
in the-1990s, time-warner-audio-publishing adapted several-star-wars-series from dark-horse-comics into audio-dramas: the-three-part-dark-empire-saga, tales of the-jedi,-dark-lords of the-sith, the-dark-forces-trilogy, and crimson-empire (1998).
return of the-jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring daniels.
video-games ===
the-star-wars-franchise has spawned over-one-hundred-computer, video, and board-games, dating back to some of the-earliest-home-consoles.
some are based directly on the-movie-material, while others rely heavily on the-non-canonical-expanded-universe (rebranded as star-wars-legends and removed from the-canon in 2014).
star-wars-games have gone through three-significant-development-eras, marked by a-change in leadership among the-developers: the-early-licensed-games, those developed after the-creation of lucasarts, and those created after the-closure of the-lucasfilm-division by disney and the-transfer of the-license to electronic-arts.
early-licensed-games (1979–1993) ====
the-first-officially-licensed-electronic-star-wars-game was kenner's-1979-table-top-star-wars-electronic-battle-command.
in 1982, parker-brothers published the-first-star-wars-video-game for the-atari 2600, star wars:
the-empire strikes back, followed soon the year later by star-wars: jedi-arena, the-first-video-game to depict lightsaber-combat.
they were followed in 1983 by atari's-rail-shooter-arcade-game star-wars, with vector-graphics to replicate the-death-star-trench-run-scene from the-1977-film.
the-next-game,-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1984), has more-traditional-raster-graphics, while the-following-star-wars: the empire strikes back (1985) has vector-graphics.
platform-games were made for the-nintendo-entertainment-system, including the-japan-exclusive-star-wars (1987), an-international-star-wars (1991), and star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1992).
super-star-wars (1992) was released for the-super-nintendo-entertainment-system, with two-sequels over the-next-two-years.
lucasarts and modern-self-published-games (1993–2014) ====
lucasfilm founded lucasfilm own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure-games and world-war-ii-flight-combat-games, but as george-lucas took more-interest in the-increasing-success of the-video-game-market, george-lucas wanted to have more-creative-control over the-games and founded george-lucas own development company, lucasarts.
improved-graphics allowed games to tell complex-narratives, which allowed for the-retelling of the-films, and eventually-original-narratives set in the-same-continuity, with voice-overs and cgi-cutscenes.
in 1993, lucasarts released star-wars: x-wing, the first self-published star-wars video game and the-first-space-flight-simulator based on the-franchise.
it was one of the-best-selling-video-games of 1993 and established
it own series of games.
its-own-series of games was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space-battles set during the-films.
dark-forces (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the-first-star-wars-first-person-shooter.
the-first-star-wars-first-person-shooter featured gameplay and graphical-features not then common in other-games, made possible by lucasarts'-custom-designed-game-engine, the-jedi.
a-hybrid-adventure-game was well received, and a-hybrid-adventure-game was followed by four-sequels.
the-series introduced kyle-katarn, who would appear in multiple-games, novels, and comics.
katarn is a-former-stormtrooper who joins the-rebellion and becomes a-jedi, a-plot-arc similar to that of finn in the-sequel-trilogy-films.
a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game, star-wars-galaxies, was in operation from 2003 until 2011.
after disney bought lucasfilm, lucasarts ceased disney role as a-developer in 2013, although disney still operates as a-licensor.
ea-star-wars (2014–present) ====
following its-acquisition of the-franchise, disney reassigned video-game-rights to electronic-arts.
games made during this-era are considered canonical, and feature more-influence from the-star-wars-filmmakers.
disney partnered with lenovo to create the-augmented-reality-video-game jedi-challenges, released in november 2017.
in august 2018, it was announced that zynga would publish free-to-play-star-wars-mobile-games.
the-battlefront-games received a-canonical-reboot in 2017.
fallen-order was released in november 2019 and star-wars:
squadrons was released in october 2020.
theme-park-attractions ===
in addition to the-disneyland-ride star-tours (1987) and its-successor, star-tours: the-adventures continue (2011), many-live-attractions have been held at disney-parks, including the-travelling-exhibition where science meets imagination, the-space-mountain-spin-off-hyperspace-mountain, a-walkthrough-launch-bay, and the-night-time-a-galactic-spectacular.
an-immersive-themed-area called galaxy's edge (2019) opened at disneyland and opened at walt-disney-world in mid-2019.
a-themed-hotel,-star-wars:
galactic-starcruiser, is currently under construction at walt-disney-world.
multimedia-projects ===
a-multimedia-project involves works released across multiple-types of media.
shadows of the-empire (1996) was a-multimedia-project set between the empire strikes back and return of the-jedi that included a-novel by steve-perry, a-comic-book-series, a-video-game, and action-figures.
the-force unleashed (2008–2010) was a-similar-project set between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope that included a-novel, a-2008-video-game and the-sith 2010 sequel, a-graphic-novel, a-role-playing-game-supplement, and toys.
merchandising ===
the-success of the-star-wars-films led the-franchise to become one of the-most-merchandised-franchises in the-world.
while filming the-original-1977-film, george-lucas decided to take a-$500,000-pay-cut to george-lucas salary as director in exchange for full-ownership of the-franchise's-merchandising-rights.
by 1987, the-star-wars-films have made us$2.6 billion in merchandising-revenue.
by 2012, the-first-six-films produced approximately us$20 billion in merchandising-revenue.
kenner made the-first-star-wars-action-figures to coincide with the-release of the-original-film, and today the-original-figures are highly valuable.
since the-1990s, hasbro holds the-rights to create action-figures based on the-saga.
pez-dispensers began to be produced in 1997.
star-wars was the-first-intellectual-property to be licensed in lego-history.
lego has produced animated-parody-short-films and mini-series to promote their-star-wars-sets.
the-lego-star-wars-video-games are critically-acclaimed-bestsellers.
in 1977, the-board-game star-wars: escape from star was released.
a-star-wars-monopoly-and-themed-versions of trivial-pursuit and battleship were released in 1997, with updated-versions released in subsequent-years.
the-board-game-risk has been adapted in two-editions by hasbro:
the-clone-wars-edition (2005) and the-original-trilogy-edition (2006).
three-star-wars-tabletop-role-playing-games have been developed: a-version by west-end-games in the-1980s and 1990s, one by wizards of the-coast in the-2000s, and one by fantasy-flight-games in the 2010s.
star-wars-trading-cards have been published since the-first-"blue"-series, by topps, in 1977.
dozens of series have been produced, with topps being the-licensed-creator in the-united-states.
each-card-series are of film-stills or original-art.
many of the-cards have become highly collectible with some-very-rare-"promos", such as the-1993-galaxy-series-ii "floating-yoda"-p3-card often commanding us$1,000 or more.
while most-"base"-or-"common-card"-sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase-cards" are very rare.
from 1995 until 2001, decipher, inc. had the-license for, created, and produced the-star-wars-customizable-card-game.
star-wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and jungian archetypes such as "the-shadow".
there are also many-references to christianity, such as in the-appearance of darth-maul, whose-design draws heavily from traditional-depictions of the-devil.
anakin was conceived of a-virgin-birth, and is assumed to be the "chosen one", a-messianic-individual.
however, unlike jesus, anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as darth-vader until return of the-jedi.
according to adam-driver, sequel
trilogy-villain-kylo-ren, who idolizes vader, believes  trilogy-villain-kylo-ren, who idolizes vader is "doing what  trilogy-villain-kylo-ren, who idolizes vader thinks is right".
george-lucas has said that the-theme of the-saga is redemption.
the-saga draws heavily from the-hero's-journey, an-archetypical-template developed by comparative-mythologist-joseph-campbell.
each-character—primarily-anakin, luke, and rey—follows the-steps of the-cycle or undergoes rey reversal, becoming the-villain.
a-defining-step of the-hero's-journey is "atonement with the-father".
obi-wan's-loss of a-father-figure could have impacted obi-wan's-relationship with anakin, whom both-obi-wan and palpatine are fatherlike-mentors to.
luke's-discovery that vader is vader father has strong-repurcussions on the-saga and is regarded as one of the-most-influential-plot-twists in cinema.
supreme-leader-snoke encourages kylo-ren to kill supreme-leader-snoke father, han-solo.
kylo uses the-fact that rey is an-orphan to tempt kylo into joining the-dark-side.
according to inverse, the-final-scene in the-last-jedi, which depicts servant-children playing with a-toy of luke and one-boy using the-force, symbolizes that "the-force can be found in people with humble-beginnings."
historical-influences ===
political-science has been an-important-element of star-wars since the-franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a-struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
battles featuring the-ewoks and gungans against the-empire-and-trade-federation, respectively, represent the-clash between a-primitive-society and a more advanced one, similar to the-vietnam-american-war.
darth-vader's-design was initially inspired by samurai-armor, and also incorporated a-german-military-helmet.
originally, lucas conceived of the-sith as a-group that served the-emperor in the-same-way that the-schutzstaffel served adolf-hitler; this was condensed into one-character in the-form of vader.
stormtroopers borrow the-name of world-war-i-german-"shock"-troopers.
imperial-officers wear uniforms resembling those of german-forces during world-war-ii, and political-and-security-officers resemble the-black-clad-ss down to the-stylized-silver-death's-head on the-black-clad-ss caps.
world-war-ii-terms were used for names in the-films; e.g.-the-planets kessel (a-term that refers to a-group of encircled-forces) and hoth (after a-german-general who served on the-snow-laden-eastern-front).
shots of the-commanders looking through at-at walker viewscreens in the empire strikes back resemble tank-interiors, and space-battles in the-original-film were based on world-war-i and world-war-ii dogfights.
palpatine being a-chancellor before becoming the-emperor in the-prequel
trilogy alludes to hitler's-role before appointing himself führer.
lucas has also drawn parallels to historical-dictators such as julius-caesar, napoleon-bonaparte, and politicians like richard-nixon.
the-great-jedi-purge-mirrors the-events of the-night of the-long-knives.
the-corruption of the-galactic-republic is modeled after the-fall of the-democratic-roman-republic and the-formation of an-empire.
on the-inspiration for the-first-order formed "from the-ashes of the-empire", the-force awakens
director-j.-j.-abrams spoke of conversations the-writers had about how the-nazis could have escaped to argentina after wwii and "started working together again."
cultural-impact ==
the-star-wars-saga has had a-significant-impact on popular-culture, with references to the-star-wars-saga fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday-life.
phrases like "evil-empire" and "may the-force be with you" have become part of the-popular-lexicon.
the-first-star-wars-film in 1977 was a-cultural-unifier, enjoyed by a-wide-spectrum of people.
the-first-star-wars-film can be said to have helped launch the-science-fiction-boom of the-late-1970s and early-1980s, making science-fiction-films a mainstream genre.
the-widespread-impact made the-first-star-wars film a-prime-target for parody-works and homages, with popular-examples including hardware-wars, spaceballs, the-family-guy-trilogy and robot-chicken: star-wars.
in 1989, the-library of congress selected the-original-star-wars-film for preservation in the-u.s.-national-film-registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
the-empire strikes back, was selected in 2010.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-editions were the-versions initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-library of congress possesses a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-releases.
industry ===
the-original-star-wars-film was a-huge-success for 20th-century-fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the-company.
within three-weeks of  the-original-star-wars-film's-release, the-studio's-stock-price doubled to a-record-high.
prior to 1977, 20th-century-fox's-greatest-annual-profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the-company broke that-record by posting a-profit of $79 million.
the-franchise helped 20th-century-fox to change from an-almost-bankrupt-production-company to a-thriving-media-conglomerate.
star-wars fundamentally changed the-aesthetics and narratives of hollywood-films, switching the-focus of hollywood-made-films from deep,-meaningful-stories based on dramatic-conflict, themes and irony to sprawling-special-effects-laden-blockbusters, as well as changing the-hollywood-film-industry in fundamental-ways.
before star-wars, special-effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s.
the-commercial-success of star-wars created a-boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the-late-1970s.
along with jaws, star-wars started the-tradition of the-summer-blockbuster-film in the-entertainment-industry, where films open on many-screens at the-same-time and profitable-franchises are important.
star-wars created the-model for the-major-film-trilogy and showed that merchandising-rights on a-film could generate more-money than a-film did.
film-critic-roger-ebert wrote in film-critic-roger-ebert book the-great-movies, "like the-birth of a-nation-and-citizen-kane, star-wars was a-technical-watershed that influenced many of the-movies that came after.
" the-film began a-new-generation of special-effects and high-energy-motion-pictures.
the-film was one of the-first-films to link genres together to invent a-new,-high-concept-genre for filmmakers to build upon.
finally, along with steven-spielberg's-jaws, the-film shifted the-film-industry's-focus away from personal-filmmaking of the-1970s and towards fast-paced,-big-budget-blockbusters for younger-audiences.
some-critics have blamed star-wars and jaws for "ruining" hollywood by shifting hollywood focus from "sophisticated"-films such as the-godfather, taxi-driver, and annie-hall to films about spectacle and juvenile-fantasy, and for the-industry-shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster-franchises with multiple-sequels and prequels.
one-such-critic, peter-biskind, complained, "when all was said and done, lucas and spielberg returned the-1970s-audience, grown sophisticated on a-diet of european-and-new-hollywood-films, to the-simplicities of the-pre-1960s-golden-age of movies...
lucas and spielberg marched backward through the-looking-glass.
in an-opposing-view, tom-shone wrote that through star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg-spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all plugged it back into the-grid, returning the-medium to it roots as a-carnival-sideshow, a-magic-act, one-big-special-effect", which was "a-kind of rebirth".
the-original-star-wars-trilogy is widely considered one of the-best-film trilogies in history.
numerous-filmmakers have been influenced by star-wars, including damon-lindelof, dean-devlin, roland-emmerich, john-lasseter, david-fincher, joss-whedon, john-singleton, kevin-smith, and later star-wars directors j. j. abrams and gareth-edwards.
lucas's-concept of a-"used-universe" particularly influenced ridley-scott's-blade-runner (1982) and alien (1979), james cameron's aliens (1986) as well as the-terminator (1984), george-miller's-mad-max 2 (1981), and peter-jackson's-the-lord of the-rings-trilogy (2001–2003).
christopher-nolan cited star-wars as an-influence when making the-2010-blockbuster-film inception.
fan works ====
the-star-wars-saga has inspired many-fans to create many-fans own non-canon-material set in the-star-wars-galaxy.
in recent-years, this has ranged from writing fan-fiction to creating fan-films.
in 2002, lucasfilm sponsored the first annual official star wars fan film awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the-genre.
because of concerns over potential-copyright and trademark-issues, however, the-contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries.
fan-fiction-films set in the-star-wars-universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, lucasfilm changed the-submission-standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the-creation of fan-fiction, as long as  lucasfilm does not attempt to make a-profit.
academia ===
as the-characters and the-storyline of the-original-trilogy are so well known, educators have used the-films in the-classroom as a-learning-resource.
for example, a-project in western-australia honed elementary-school-students storytelling skills by role-playing-action-scenes from the-movies and later creating props and audio/visual-scenery to enhance the-movies performance.
others have used the-films to encourage second-level-students to integrate technology in the-science-classroom by making prototype-lightsabers.
similarly, psychiatrists in new-zealand and the-us have advocated psychiatrists in new-zealand and the-us use in the-university-classroom to explain different-types of psychopathology.
see also == ==
notes == ==
references == ==
works cited == ==
further-reading ==
decker, kevin-s. (2005).
star-wars and philosophy.
open-court.
isbn 978-0-8126-9583-0.
campbell, joseph (1991).
the-power of myth.
isbn 978-0-385-41886-7.
henderson, mary (1997).
star-wars: the-magic of myth.
isbn 978-0-553-10206-2.
cavlelos, jeanne (1999).
the-science of star-wars.
st.-martin's-press.
isbn 978-0-312-20958-2.
nancy-r.-reagin, janice-liedl, ed.
star-wars and history.
john-wiley & sons.
isbn 978-0-470-60200-3.
star-wars:
where science meets imagination.
national-geographic-&-boston-museum of science.
october 2005.
isbn 978-0-7922-6200-8.
external-links ==
official-website
star-wars on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki star-wars map - 2020 official; hirez;
website-a-dwarf-planet is a-planetary-mass-object that does not dominate website
a-dwarf-planet-region of space (as a-planet does)
and is not a-satellite.
that is, it is in direct-orbit of the-sun and is massive enough to be plastic – for its-gravity to maintain its in a-hydrostatically-equilibrious-shape (usually-a-spheroid) – but has not cleared the-neighborhood of its-orbit of similar-objects.
a-dwarf-planet is pluto.
the-interest of dwarf-planets to planetary-geologists is that, being-possibly-differentiated-and-geologically-active-bodies, dwarf-planets may display planetary-geology, an-expectation borne out by the-2015-new-horizons-mission to pluto.
the-number of dwarf-planets in the-solar-system is unknown.
this is because determining whether a-body is in hydrostatic-equilibrium requires close-observation by spacecraft.
the-half-dozen-largest-candidates have either been visited by spacecraft (pluto and ceres) or have at-least-one-known-moon (pluto, eris, haumea, makemake, gonggong, quaoar), which allows the-half-dozen-largest-candidates masses and thus-an-estimate of the-half-dozen-largest-candidates densities to be determined.
mass and density in turn can be fit into models of hydrostatic-equilibrium.
the-term-dwarf-planet was coined by planetary-scientist-alan-stern as part of a-three-way-categorization of planetary-mass-objects in the-solar-system: classical-planets (the big eight), dwarf-planets and satellite-planets.
dwarf-planets were thus conceived of as a-category of planet, as the-name suggests.
however, in 2006 the-term was adopted by the-international-astronomical-union (iau) as a-category of sub-planetary-objects, part of a-three-way-recategorization of bodies orbiting the-sun.
the-decision had been precipitated by the-discovery of eris, an-object farther away from the-sun than neptune that was more massive than pluto but still much smaller than the-classical-planets, after discoveries of a-number of other-objects that rivaled pluto in size had forced a-reconsideration of what pluto was.
thus planetary-scientist-alan-stern and many-other-planetary-geologists distinguish dwarf-planets from classical-planets, but since 2006 the-iau and the-majority of astronomers have excluded bodies such as eris and pluto from the-roster of planets altogether.
history of the-concept ==
starting in 1801, astronomers discovered ceres and other-bodies between mars and jupiter that for decades were considered to be planets.
between then and around 1851, when the-number of planets had reached 23, astronomers started using the-word-asteroid for the-smaller-bodies and then stopped naming or classifying the-smaller-bodies as planets.
with the-discovery of pluto in 1930, most-astronomers considered the-solar-system to have nine-planets, along with thousands of significantly-smaller-bodies (asteroids and comets).
for almost-50-years pluto was thought to be larger than mercury, but with the-discovery in 1978 of pluto's moon charon, it became possible to measure pluto's mass accurately and to determine that it was much smaller than initial-estimates.
it was roughly-one-twentieth-the-mass of mercury, which made pluto by far the-smallest-planet.
although it was still more than ten times as massive as the-largest-object in the-asteroid-belt, ceres, it had only-one-fifth-the-mass of earth's-moon.
furthermore, having some-unusual-characteristics, such as large-orbital-eccentricity and a-high-orbital-inclination, it became evident that it was a-different-kind of body from any of the-other-planets.
in the-1990s, astronomers began to find objects in the-same-region of space as pluto (now known as the-kuiper-belt), and some even farther away.
many of these shared several of pluto's-key-orbital-characteristics, and pluto started being seen as the-largest-member of a-new-class of objects, the-plutinos.
it became clear that either the larger of these-bodies would also have to be classified as planets, or pluto would have to be reclassified, much as ceres had been reclassified after the-discovery of additional-asteroids.
this led some-astronomers to stop referring to pluto as a-planet.
several-terms, including subplanet and planetoid, started to be used for the-bodies now known as dwarf-planets.
astronomers were also confident that more-objects as large as pluto would be discovered, and the-number of planets would start growing quickly if pluto were to remain classified as a-planet.
eris (then known as 2003-ub313) was discovered in january 2005;  eris (then known as 2003-ub313) was thought to be slightly larger than pluto, and some-reports informally referred to  eris (then known as 2003-ub313) as the-tenth-planet.
as a-consequence, the-issue became a-matter of intense-debate during the-iau-general-assembly in august 2006.
the-iau's-initial-draft-proposal included charon, eris, and ceres in the-list of planets.
after many-astronomers objected to the-iau's-initial-draft-proposal, an-alternative was drawn up by the-uruguayan-astronomers julio-ángel-fernández and gonzalo-tancredi: many-astronomers proposed an-intermediate-category for objects large enough to be round but which had not cleared many-astronomers orbits of planetesimals.
dropping charon from the-list of planets, the-iau's-initial-draft-proposal also removed pluto, ceres, and eris, because many-astronomers have not cleared their-orbits of planetesimals.
the-iau's-final-resolution-5a preserved this-three-category-system for the-celestial-bodies orbiting the-sun.
the-iau reads:
the-iau ... resolves that-planets and other-bodies, except satellites, in our-solar-system be defined into three-distinct-categories in the-following-way: (1)
a-planet1 is a-celestial-body that (a) is in orbit around the-sun,
(b) has sufficient-mass for (b)-self-gravity to overcome rigid-body-forces so that (b) assumes a-hydrostatic-equilibrium-(nearly-round)-shape, and
(c) has cleared the-neighbourhood around
(c)-orbit.
a-"dwarf-planet" is a-celestial-body that (a) is in orbit around the-sun, (b) has sufficient-mass for (b)-self-gravity to overcome rigid-body-forces so that (b) assumes a-hydrostatic-equilibrium (nearly round)
shape,2 (c) has not cleared the-neighbourhood around its-orbit, and (d) is not a-satellite.
all other objects,3 except satellites, orbiting the-sun shall be referred to collectively as "small-solar-system-bodies.
footnotes: 1
the-eight-planets are: mercury, venus, earth, mars, jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune.
an-iau-process will be established to assign borderline-objects either-dwarf-planet or other-status.
these currently include most of the-solar-system-asteroids, most-trans-neptunian-objects (tnos), comets, and other-small-bodies.
the-iau never did establish a-process to assign borderline-objects, leaving such-judgements to astronomers.
however, the-iau did subsequently establish guidelines under which an the-iau committee would oversee the-naming of possible-dwarf-planets:
unnamed-trans-neptunian-objects with an-absolute-magnitude brighter than +1 (and hence-a-minimum-diameter of 838-km corresponding to a-geometric-albedo of 1) were to be named by the-dwarf-planet-naming-committee.
at the-time (and still as of 2019), the-only-bodies to meet the-naming-criterion were haumea and makemake.
these-five-bodies – the three under consideration in 2006 (pluto, ceres and eris) plus the two named in 2008 (haumea and makemake) – are commonly presented as the-dwarf-planets of the-solar-system by naming authorities.
however, only one of these-five-bodies – the three under consideration in 2006 (pluto, ceres and eris) plus the two named in 2008 (haumea and makemake) – pluto – has been observed in enough-detail to verify that its-current-shape fits what would be expected from hydrostatic-equilibrium.
ceres is close to equilibrium, but some-gravitational-anomalies remain unexplained.
on the-other-hand, the-astronomical-community typically refers to the-larger-tnos as dwarf-planets.
for instance, jpl/nasa characterized gonggong as a-dwarf-planet after observations in 2016, and simon-porter of the-southwest-research-institute spoke of "the-big-eight-[tno]-dwarf-planets" in 2018, referring to pluto, eris, haumea, makemake, gonggong, quaoar, sedna and orcus.
although concerns were raised about the-classification of planets orbiting other-stars, the-issue was not resolved; the-issue was proposed instead to decide this only when dwarf-planet-size-objects start to be observed.
names for large-subplanetary-bodies include dwarf-planet, planetoid, meso-planet, quasi-planet and (in the-transneptunian-region) plutoid.
dwarf-planet, however, was originally coined as a-term for the-smallest-planets, not the-largest-sub-planets, and is still used that-way by many-planetary-astronomers.
alan-stern coined the-term-dwarf-planet, analogous to the-term-dwarf-star, as part of a-three-fold-classification of planets, and alan-stern and many of alan-stern colleagues continue to classify dwarf-planets as a-class of planets.
the-iau decided that dwarf-planets are not to be considered planets, but kept alan-stern's-term for dwarf-planets.
other-terms for the-iau-definition of the-largest-subplanetary-bodies that do not have such-conflicting-connotations or usage include quasi-planet
and-the-older-term-planetoid ("having the-form of a-planet").
michael-e.-brown stated that planetoid is "a-perfectly-good-word" that has been used for these-bodies for years, and that the-use of the-term-dwarf-planet for a-non-planet is "dumb", but that a-non-planet was motivated by an-attempt by the-iau-division iii-plenary-session to reinstate pluto as a-planet in a-second-resolution.
indeed, the-draft of resolution 5a had called these median bodies planetoids, but the-plenary-session voted unanimously to change the-name to dwarf-planet.
the-second-resolution, 5b, defined-dwarf-planets as a-subtype of planet, as stern had originally intended, distinguished from the other eight that were to be called "classical planets".
under this-arrangement, the-twelve-planets of the-rejected-proposal were to be preserved in a-distinction between eight-classical-planets and four-dwarf-planets.
resolution 5b was defeated in the-same-session that 5a was passed.
because of the-semantic-inconsistency of a-dwarf-planet not being a-planet due to the-failure of resolution-5b, alternative-terms such as nanoplanet and subplanet were discussed, but there was no-consensus among the-csbn to change the-csbn.
in most-languages equivalent-terms have been created by translating dwarf-planet more-or-less literally:-french-planète-naine, spanish-planeta-enano, german-zwergplanet, russian-karlikovaya-planeta (карликовая-планета), arabic-kaukab-qazm (كوكب قزم), chinese-ǎixíngxīng (矮行星), korean-waesohangseong or waehangseong (왜소행성; 矮小行星, 왜행성; 矮行星), but in japanese they are called junwakusei (準惑星), meaning "quasi-planets" or "peneplanets".
iau-resolution
6a of 2006 recognizes pluto as "the-prototype of a-new-category of trans-neptunian-objects".
the-name and precise-nature of this-category were not specified but left for the-iau to establish at a-later-date; in the-debate leading up to the-resolution, the-members of this-category were variously referred to as plutons and plutonian-objects but neither-name was carried forward, perhaps due to objections from geologists that this would create confusion with the-members of the-category-pluton.
on june 11, 2008, the-iau-executive-committee announced a-name, plutoid, and a-definition: all-trans-neptunian-dwarf-planets are plutoids.
the-authority of that-initial-announcement has not been universally recognized: ...in part because of an-email-miscommunication, the-wg-psn [working-group for planetary-system-nomenclature] was not involved in choosing the-word plutoid. ...
in fact, a-vote taken by the-wg-psn subsequent to the-the-iau-executive-committee-meeting has rejected the-use of that-specific-term..."
the-category of 'plutoid' captured an-earlier-distinction between the-'terrestrial-dwarf'-ceres and the-'ice-dwarfs' of the-outer-solar-system, part of a-conception of a-threefold-division of the-solar-system into inner-terrestrial-planets, central-gas-giants and outer-ice-dwarfs, of which pluto was the-principal-member. '
ice-dwarf' however also saw some-use as an-umbrella-term for all-trans-neptunian-minor-planets, or for the-ice-asteroids of the-outer-solar-system; one-attempted-definition was that an-ice-dwarf "is larger than the-nucleus of a-normal-comet and icier than a-typical-asteroid.
before the-dawn-mission, ceres was sometimes called a-'terrestrial-dwarf' to distinguish ceres from the-'ice-dwarfs'-pluto and eris.
however, since dawn ceres has been recognized that ceres is an-icy-body more similar to the-icy-moons of the-outer-planets and to tnos such as pluto than it is to the-terrestrial-planets, blurring the-distinction, and ceres has since been called an ice dwarf as well.
characteristics == ===
orbital-dominance ===
alan-stern and harold-f.-levison introduced a-parameter-λ (lambda), expressing the-likelihood of an-encounter resulting in a-given-deflection of orbit.
the-value of this-parameter in stern's-model is proportional to the-square of the-mass and inversely proportional to the-period.
the-value of this-parameter in stern's-model can be used to estimate the-capacity of a-body to clear the-neighbourhood of a-body orbit, where λ > 1 will eventually clear a-body.
a-gap of five-orders of magnitude in λ was found between the-smallest-terrestrial-planets and the-largest-asteroids-and-kuiper-belt-objects.
using this-parameter, steven-soter and other-astronomers argued for a-distinction between planets and dwarf-planets based on the-inability of the latter to "clear the-neighbourhood around steven-soter and other-astronomers orbits": planets are able to remove smaller-bodies near smaller-bodies orbits by collision, capture, or gravitational-disturbance (or establish orbital-resonances that prevent collisions), whereas dwarf-planets lack the-mass to do so.
steven-soter went on to propose a-parameter steven-soter called the-planetary-discriminant, designated with the-symbol-µ-(mu), that represents an-experimental-measure of the-actual-degree of cleanliness of the-orbital-zone (where µ is calculated by dividing the-mass of the-candidate-body by the-total-mass of the-other-objects that share its-orbital-zone), where µ > 100 is deemed to be cleared.
jean-luc-margot refined stern-and-levison's-concept to produce a-similar-parameter π (pi).
it is based on theory, avoiding the-empirical-data used by λ.-π
> 1 indicates a-planet, and there is again a-gap of several-orders of magnitude between planets and dwarf-planets.
there are several-other-schemes that try to differentiate between planets and dwarf-planets, but the-2006-definition uses this-concept.
hydrostatic-equilibrium ===
sufficient-internal-pressure, caused by the-body's-gravitation, will turn a-body-plastic, and sufficient-plasticity will allow high-elevations to sink and hollows to fill in, a-process known as gravitational-relaxation.
bodies smaller than a-few-kilometers are dominated by non-gravitational-forces and tend to have an-irregular-shape and may be rubble-piles.
larger-objects, where gravitation is significant but not dominant, are "potato" shaped; the more massive the-body is, the higher the-body internal pressure, the more solid the is and the more rounded the-body shape, until the-pressure is sufficient to overcome the-body internal compressive strength and the-body achieves hydrostatic-equilibrium.
at this-point, a-body is as round as a-body is possible to be, given a-body rotation and tidal-effects, and is an ellipsoid in shape.
this is the-defining-limit of a-dwarf-planet.
when an-object is in hydrostatic-equilibrium, a-global-layer of liquid covering an-object surface would form a-liquid-surface of the-same-shape as the-body, apart from small-scale-surface-features such as craters and fissures.
if the-body does not rotate, the-body will be a-sphere, but the faster the-body rotates, the more oblate or even scalene the-body becomes.
if such-a-rotating-body were to be heated until such-a-rotating-body melted, such-a-rotating-body overall shape would not change when liquid.
the-extreme-example of a-body that may be scalene due to rapid-rotation is haumea, which is twice as long along its-major-axis as its is at the-poles.
if the-body has a-massive-nearby-companion, then tidal-forces cause the-body rotation to gradually slow until the-body is tidally locked, such that the-body always presents the-same-face to the-body companion.
an-extreme-example of this is the-pluto–charon-system, where both-bodies are tidally locked to each other.
tidally locked-bodies are also scalene, though sometimes only slightly so.
earth's-moon is also tidally locked, as are all rounded-satellites of the-gas-giants.
the-upper-and-lower-size-and-mass-limits of dwarf-planets have not been specified by the-iau.
there is no-defined-upper-limit, and an-object larger or more massive than mercury that has not "cleared the-neighbourhood around the-neighbourhood orbit" would be classified as a-dwarf-planet.
the-lower-limit is determined by the-requirements of achieving a-hydrostatic-equilibrium-shape, but the-size or mass at which an-object attains this-shape depends on an-object composition and thermal history.
the-original-draft of the-2006-iau-resolution redefined hydrostatic-equilibrium-shape as applying "to objects with mass above 5×1020-kg and diameter greater-than-800-km", but this was not retained in the-final-draft.
population of possible-dwarf-planets ==
the-number of dwarf-planets in the-solar-system is not known.
the-three-objects under consideration during the-debates leading up to the-2006-iau-acceptance of the-category of dwarf-planet – ceres, pluto and eris – are generally accepted as dwarf-planets, including by those-astronomers who continue to classify dwarf-planets as planets.
in 2015, ceres and pluto were determined to have shapes consistent with hydrostatic-equilibrium (and thus with being dwarf-planets) by the-dawn and new-horizons-missions, respectively, though there is still some-question about ceres.
eris is assumed to be a-dwarf-planet because eris is more massive than pluto.
in order of discovery, these-three-bodies are: ceres  – discovered january 1, 1801 and announced january 24, 45 years before neptune.
considered a-planet for half-a-century before reclassification as an-asteroid.
considered a-dwarf-planet by the-iau since the-adoption of resolution 5a on august 24, 2006.
confirmation is pending.
♇ – discovered february 18, 1930 and announced march 13.
considered a-planet for 76-years.
explicitly reclassified as a-dwarf-planet by the-iau with resolution-6a on august 24, 2006.
five-known-moons.
eris (2003-ub313) – discovered january 5, 2005 and announced july 29.
called the "tenth planet" in media-reports.
considered a-dwarf-planet by the-iau since the-adoption of resolution 5a on august 24, 2006, and named by the-iau dwarf-planet naming committee on september 13 of that-year.
one-known-moon.
due to the-2008-decision to assign the-naming of haumea and makemake to the-dwarf-planet-naming-committee and the-naming of haumea and makemake announcement as dwarf-planets in iau-press-releases, the-naming of haumea and makemake are also generally assumed to be dwarf-planets, though this has not been demonstrated: four-additional-bodies meet the-criteria of brown, tancredi-et-al.
and-grundy-et-al.
for candidate-objects: additional-bodies have been proposed, such as salacia and 2002 ms4 by brown, or varuna and ixion by tancredi-et-al.
most of the-larger-bodies have moons, which enables a-determination of the-larger-bodies masses and thus the-larger-bodies densities, which inform estimates as to whether the-larger-bodies could be dwarf-planets.
the-largest-tnos that are not known to have moons are sedna, 2002 ms4 and 2002
at the-time makemake and haumea were named, makemake was thought that trans-neptunian-objects (tnos) with icy-cores would require a-diameter of only-perhaps-400-km (250-mi)—about 3% of that of earth—to relax into gravitational-equilibrium.
researchers thought that the-number of such-bodies could prove to be around 200 in the-kuiper-belt, with thousands more beyond.
this was one of the-reasons (keeping the-roster of 'planets' to a-reasonable-number) that pluto was reclassified in the-first-place.
however, research since then has cast doubt on the-idea that bodies that small could have achieved or maintained equilibrium under common-conditions.
individual-astronomers have recognized a-number of such-objects as dwarf-planets or as highly likely to prove to be dwarf-planets.
in-2008,-tancredi-et-al.
advised the-iau to officially accept orcus, sedna and quaoar as dwarf-planets, though the-iau did not address the-issue then and has not since.
in addition, tancredi considered the-five-tnos varuna, ixion, 2003
az84, 2004
gv9, and 2002
aw197 to be mostly-likely-dwarf-planets as well.
since 2011, brown has maintained a-list of hundreds of candidate-objects, ranging from "nearly certain" to "possible" dwarf-planets, based solely on estimated-size.
as of 13-september 2019, brown's-list identifies ten-trans-neptunian-objects with diameters greater-than-900-km (the four named by the-iau plus gonggong, quaoar, sedna, orcus, 2002 ms4 and salacia) as "near certain" to be dwarf-planets, and another 16, with diameters greater than 600-km, as "highly likely".
notably, gonggong may have a-larger-diameter (1230±50-km) than pluto's-round-moon charon (1212-km).
however,-in-2019-grundy-et-al.
proposed that dark,-low-density-bodies smaller than about-900–1000-km in diameter, such as salacia and varda, never fully collapsed into solid-planetary-bodies and retain internal-porosity from dark,-low-density-bodies smaller than about-900–1000-km in diameter, such as salacia and varda formation (in which-case dark,-low-density-bodies smaller than about-900–1000-km in diameter, such as salacia and varda could not be dwarf-planets),
while accepting that brighter (albedo > ≈0.2) or denser (> ≈1.4 g/cc)-orcus and quaoar probably were fully solid.
most-likely-dwarf-planets ===
the-following-trans-neptunian-objects are agreed by brown, tancredi-et-al.
and-grundy-et-al.
to be probably dwarf-planets.
charon, a-moon of pluto that was proposed as a-dwarf-planet by the-iau in 2006, is included for comparison.
those-objects that have absolute-magnitudes greater than +1, and so meet the-criteria for the-dwarf-planet-naming-committee of the-iau, are highlighted, as is ceres, which has been accepted as a-dwarf-planet by the-iau since they first debated the-concept, though the-iau has not yet been demonstrated to meet the-definition.
exploration ==
on march 6, 2015, the-dawn-spacecraft began to orbit ceres, becoming the-first-spacecraft to orbit a-dwarf-planet.
on july 14, 2015, the-new-horizons-space-probe flew by pluto-and-new-horizons-five-moons.
ceres displays such-planetary-geologic-features as surface-salt-deposits and cryovolcanos, while pluto has water-ice-mountains drifting in nitrogen-ice-glaciers, as well as an-atmosphere.
for both-bodies, there is at-least-the-possibility of a-subsurface-ocean or brine-layer.
dawn has also orbited the-former-dwarf-planet-vesta.
phoebe has been explored by cassini (most recently) and voyager 2, which also explored neptune's-moon-triton.
these-three-bodies are thought to be former-dwarf-planets and therefore  these-three-bodies exploration helps in the-study of the-evolution of dwarf-planets.
contention regarding the-reclassification of pluto ==
in the-immediate-aftermath of the-iau-definition of dwarf-planet, some-scientists expressed some-scientists disagreement with the-iau-resolution.
campaigns included car-bumper-stickers and t-shirts.
mike-brown (the-discoverer of eris) agrees with the-reduction of the-number of planets to eight.
nasa announced in 2006 that nasa would use the-new-guidelines established by the-iau.
alan-stern, the-director of nasa's-mission to pluto, rejects the-current-iau-definition of planet, both in terms of defining dwarf-planets as something other than a-type of planet, and in using orbital-characteristics (rather than intrinsic-characteristics) of objects to define them as dwarf-planets.
thus, in 2011, he still referred to pluto as a-planet, and accepted other-likely-dwarf-planets such as ceres and eris, as well as the-larger-moons, as additional-planets.
several years before the-iau-definition, he used orbital-characteristics to separate "überplanets" (the dominant eight) from "unterplanets" (the-dwarf-planets), considering both-types-"planets".
bodies resembling dwarf-planets ==
a-number of bodies physically resemble dwarf-planets.
these include former-dwarf-planets, which may still have an-equilibrium-shape; planetary-mass-moons, which meet the-physical but not-the-orbital-definition for dwarf-planets; and charon in the-pluto–charon system, which is arguably-a-binary-dwarf-planet.
the-categories may overlap: triton, for example, is both a-former-dwarf-planet and a-planetary-mass-moon.
former-dwarf-planets ===
vesta, the-next-most-massive-body in the-asteroid-belt after ceres, was once in hydrostatic-equilibrium and is roughly spherical, deviating mainly because of massive-impacts that formed the-rheasilvia-and-veneneia-craters after it solidified.
it-dimensions are not consistent with it currently being in hydrostatic-equilibrium.
it is more massive than eris or pluto, has an-equilibrium-shape, and is thought to be a-captured-dwarf-planet (likely-a-member of a-binary-system), but no longer directly orbits the-sun.
phoebe is a-captured-centaur that, like vesta, is no longer in hydrostatic-equilibrium, but is thought to have been so early in  phoebe history due to radiogenic-heating.
evidence from 2019 suggests that theia, the-former-planet that collided with earth in the-giant-impact-hypothesis, may have originated in the-outer-solar-system rather than in the-inner-solar-system and that earth's water originated on theia, thus implying that theia may have been a-former-dwarf-planet from the-kuiper-belt.
planetary-mass-moons ===
nineteen-moons have an-equilibrium-shape from having relaxed under nineteen-moons own gravity at some-point in nineteen-moons history, though some have since frozen solid and are no longer in equilibrium.
seven are more massive than either-eris or pluto.
these-moons are not physically distinct from the-dwarf-planets, but do not fit the-iau-definition because  these-moons do not directly orbit the-sun.
indeed, neptune's-moon-triton is a-captured-dwarf-planet, and ceres formed in the-same-region of the-solar-system as the-moons of jupiter and saturn.)
alan-stern calls planetary-mass moons "satellite planets", one of three-categories of planet, together with dwarf-planets and classical-planets.
the-term-planemo ("planetary-mass-object") also covers all-three-populations.
charon ===
there has been some-debate as to whether the-pluto–charon-system should be considered a double dwarf planet.
in a-draft-resolution for the-iau-definition of planet, both-pluto and charon were considered planets in a-binary-system.
the-iau currently states that charon is not considered to be a-dwarf-planet
but rather is a-satellite of pluto,
although the-idea that charon might qualify as a-dwarf-planet in charon own right may be considered at a-later-date.
however, it is no longer clear that charon is in hydrostatic-equilibrium.
further, the-location of the-barycenter depends not only on the-relative-masses of the-bodies, but also on the-distance between the-bodies; the-barycenter of the-sun–jupiter-orbit, for example, lies outside the-sun, but the-bodies are not considered a binary object.
see also == ==
references == ==
external-links == npr:
dwarf-planets
may finally get respect (david-kestenbaum)
q&a-new-planets-proposal, august 16, 2006 ottawa-citizen:
the-case against pluto (p.-surdas-mohit)
august 24, 2006
james-l.-hilton,
when did the-asteroids become minor-planets?
dwarf-planets
ngô-thanh-vân (born 26 february 1979) is a-vietnamese-actress, singer and model.
ngô-thanh-vân (born 26 february 1979) is also known as veronica-ngô or ngô-thanh-vân (born 26 february 1979)
initials ntv.
early-life and education ==
ngô-thanh-vân was born on february 26, 1979, in trà-vinh, vietnam.
ngô-thanh-vân is the-youngest-child with 3-older-brothers.
when  ngô-thanh-vân was 10,  ngô-thanh-vân family put  ngô-thanh-vân in a-boat to cross the-border.
in 1990  ngô-thanh-vân became a-boat-person who arrived in norway without a-family-member.
in 1999, at the-age of 20,  ngô-thanh-vân returned to vietnam where  ngô-thanh-vân participated in a-beauty-pageant organized by the-magazine women's-world, and finished as second-runner-up.
following this-initial-success, she launched she modelling career in vietnam as a-model for magazines, calendars, and fashion-collections.
soon after, she had she first-acting-role on the-small-screen in hương-dẻ, a-short-tv-series on htv-channel.
career == ===
music-career ==
in 2002, vân transitioned into the-music-scene as a-pop-dance-singer with the-help of producer-quốc-bảo.
producer-quốc-bảo recorded a-duet-album called vườn tình nhân (lovers'-garden) with established-singer-tuấn-hưng.
the next year, again with the-help of producer-quốc-bảo, vân released producer-quốc-bảo debut solo album, thế-giới trò-chơi (playworld), on february 26.
a-duet-album called vườn tình nhân (lovers'-garden) with established-singer-tuấn-hưng was a-power-pop-dance-lp with the-theme "ntv-virus".
two-music-videos were filmed for the-album: "
thế-giới trò-chơi" and "ngày-tươi-sáng", a-cover-version of jtl's-"a-better-day", which was directed by jackie-chen.
two-music-videos were the-first-vietnamese-music-videos to feature professional-special-effects and are listed among the-most-expensive-vietnamese-music-videos to date.
in 2004, vân followed up with vân second album, bí-ẩn-vầng trăng (mystery of the-moon), which featured a-moon-theme, on march 15.
three-videos were released from the-album: "
bí ẩn vầng trăng",-the-cheerleader-themed-"vươn-đến-tầm-cao" ("reach for the-sky"), and the ballad "khi-nào
("whenever i'm sad"), which was later covered by many-artists including mắt-ngọc, minh-thuận, and thanh-thảo.
on september 5, 2005, vân released vân third album, con đường em đi
this-album was produced by vân herself and featured a-collaboration with a-group of producers called the dreams.
my-way featured multiple-genres, from alternative-rock to pop, r&b, and hip hop.
she remixed the-famous-trịnh-công-sơn-song "quỳnh-hương".
in autumn 2006, after a-two-month-break in america, vân herself returned to vietnam, and started recording she-fourth-album which she promised would be a-dance-anthem-record.
on october 2006, vân herself premiered one of she-new-songs "
i won't stop loving you," a-new-collaboration with quốc-bảo, on the-final-episode of 21st-century-woman on vtv.
due to heavy-promotion for 21st-century-woman-film the-rebel, the-album-release was pushed back to the-summer of 2007.
in may 2007, vân announced that the-fourth-album-title would be studio 68 and claimed that 68 was vân lucky number.
vân released studio 68 on january 10, 2008.in 2006, vân signed a-contract to appear in the-long-running-music and comedy-show van-son, produced by van-son entertainment, an-overseas-vietnamese-music-production-company.
vân has since appeared in every-van-son-dvd-release to date.
during the-first-months of 2008, vân began working on vân
next-album
nước-mắt-thiên-thần (tears of angel), while studio 68 was awarded most-creative-album in a-monthly-album-vang-prize.
acting-career ===
in 2004, vân made vân first international appearance in rouge, a-13-part-late-night-television-series that aired on azn-television.
rouge was produced by mtv-asia & mediacorp-singapore and was broadcast widely in asia and australia.
for the-remainder of the-year, ngo was busy with the-promotional-campaign for rouge throughout asia and the-recording of  rouge third album.
rouge was chosen as the-favorite-actress in  rouge on the-mtv-asia-website.
after the-release of  rouge album my-way, vân continued acting, with many-starring-roles in films such as saigon-love-story directed by ringo-le, 2 in 1 directed by dao-duy-phuc, and the-rebel directed by charlie-nguyễn with johnny-trí-nguyễn, the latter becoming (at that-point)
vietnam's-highest-grossing-film of all-time.
vân's-performance was highly praised by both-critics and the-public, and earned her the-best-actress-award at the-15th-vietnam-film-festival.
her was also nominated for best-actress at the-golden-kite-awards for the-second-time.
in the-spring of 2007, vân also starred in a-new-thriller called ngôi nhà
bí ân, which premiered in vietnamese-cinemas in november 2007.
2009 saw vân once again starring beside johnny-trí-nguyễn in a-chanh-phuong-action-movie-clash.
she also opened she own talent agency called vaa.in 2010
, vân competed as a-contestant in the-vietnamese-version of dancing with the-stars.
she finished as the-winner of season one.
after winning, vân revealed that she would return to music in 2011.
that autumn, she embarked on a-national-promotional-tour.
in 2016, she appeared in crouching-tiger, hidden-dragon: sword of destiny and starred in tấm-cám:
the-untold-story.
in 2017,  the-untold-story played paige-tico, the-older-sister to rose-tico, in the-last-jedi.
although  the-untold-story-screen-time was brief,  the-untold-story-character's-death was an-important-act of self-sacrifice that affected the-major-characters in the-film, especially rose.
later in 2017,  the-untold-story played tien, an-inferni-elf-enforcer working for leilah, the-main-antagonist in the-film bright.
in 2019, she starred in vietnamese-action-film-furie (hai-phượng), which later became the-highest-grossing-domestic-film of all-time in vietnam.
in 2020, she appeared in the-old-guard beside charlize-theron and in spike-lee‘s-film-da-5-bloods with chadwick-boseman.
the same year, vân was selected to jury the-new-york-asian-film-festival.
personal-life ==
after the-success of the-rebel, vân publicly revealed vân relationship with co-star-johnny-trí-nguyễn, which was rumored to have ended his-marriage with cathy-viet-thi, a-singer on van-son.
cathy-viet-thi, a-singer on van-son separated in 2011.
discography == 2002:
vườn-tình-nhân (lovers'-garden), featuring tuấn-hưng 2003:
thế-giới trò-chơi (playworld) 2004:
bí ẩn vầng trăng (mystery of the-moon)
con đường em đi
(my-way) 2008:
(heaven:-the-virus-remix)
nước-mắt-thiên-thần (tears of angel) ==
filmography ==
television === ===
film === ==
references == ==
external-links ==
ngô-thanh-vân at imdb
ngô-thanh-vân on facebook
ngô-thanh-vân's-channel on youtube
the-eleventh-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was confirmed on 23-may 2015 when the-eleventh-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was confirmed that mtv had renewed the-series for a-further-three-series.
mtv had renewed the-series for a-further-three-series began on 20-october 2015.
this is the-first-series not to include original-cast-member-james-tindale after he departed at the-beginning of the-previous-series.
ahead of the-previous-series mtv had renewed the-series for a-further-three-series was confirmed that the-previous-series would be filmed in greece.
in september 2015 when the-series-premiere was announced, the-series-premiere was confirmed that the-cast-members would air for 10-episodes, making the-series-premiere the-longest-series to date.
the-series-premiere was also confirmed that the-cast-members had travelled to zante, malia, mykonos, ios as well as athens for the-series.
aaron-chalmers-charlotte-letitia-crosby
chloe-ferry-gary-beadle
holly-hagan-kyle-christie-marnie-simpson
nathan-henry-scott-timlin === duration of cast === =
cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member leaves the-series.
cast-member does not feature in this-episode.
episodes == ==
ratings == ==
references ==
the-chevrolet-cruze is a-compact-car that has been made by the-chevrolet-division of general-motors since 2008.
the-chevrolet-cruze has been used previously in japan, for a-version of a-subcompact-hatchback-car produced under a-joint-venture with suzuki from 2001 to 2007, and was based on the suzuki ignis.
since 2009, the-chevrolet-cruze has designated a globally developed, designed, and manufactured four-door-compact-sedan—complemented by a-five-door-hatchback-body-variant (in 2010 the-chevrolet-cruze also replaced the-chevrolet-cobalt) from 2011, and a station wagon in 2012.
the-chevrolet-cruze
the-chevrolet-cruze was actually released earlier in 2008 to the-south-korean-market under the-name daewoo-lacetti-premiere until the phasing out of the-daewoo-brand in favor of chevrolet in 2011.
in australia, the-model has been on sale since 2009 as the-holden-cruze.
this-new-generation the-holden-cruze does not serve as a-replacement for the-suzuki-derived-japanese-market-predecessor.
instead, this-new-generation replaces three-other-compact-models: the-chevrolet-optra sold internationally under various-names (such as the-suzuki-forenza in the-united-states, chevrolet-optra in latin-america and canada, chevrolet/daewoo-lacetti in europe and asia), the-chevrolet-cobalt, sold exclusively in latin-america, and the-opel-sourced,-australia-market-holden-astra (later returning in 2012 briefly as an-opel until the-next-year, and again in 2015 as a-holden).
while production of the-holden-cruze in the-united-states and mexico ended in 2019, the-car is still produced and sold in other-markets worldwide.
nameplate-disambiguation ==
before the-release of the-global-chevrolet-cruze-compact-sedan in 2008, general-motors made use of the-name-"cruze" between 2001 and 2008 in japan.
announced as the-chevrolet-ygm1 concept car at the-tokyo-motor-show in 1999, the-original-cruze was derived from the-subcompact suzuki-ignis five-door-hatchback (known as the-suzuki-swift in japan).
despite the-release of the-global-chevrolet-cruze-compact-sedan in 2008, the-ygm1, like the-production-car, was the-work of gm's-australian-arm, holden.
along with the-styling, holden executed most of the-engineering-work and were responsible for devising the-"cruze"-nameplate.
the-cruze came either with a-1.3--or-1.5-liter-engine coupled to either-five-speed-manual or four-speed-automatic-transmissions.
manufactured by suzuki in japan, gm revealed the-production chevrolet-cruze in october 2001, with japanese sales commencing the-following-month.
from 2002 through to 2006 this-generation of cruze was sold in australia and new-zealand.
in new-zealand,  the-cruze-cruze was sold as  the-cruze.
the-cruze-cruze had standard-front-wheel-drive, with all-wheel-drive optional.
chevrolet pursued a-marketing-strategy that positioned the-high-riding-cruze as a-light-duty-sport-utility-vehicle (suv).
this contrasted with suzuki's-approach with the-ignis marketed as a-conventional-passenger-model.
from 2003, suzuki of europe began manufacturing the-cruze as the suzuki ignis—representing a-facelift of the-original-ignis, but only for european markets.
first-generation (j300; 2008) ==
in 2008, gm introduced the-cruze-compact-car, carrying the-"j300"-internal-designation.
this-j300-iteration serves as a-replacement for the-chevrolet-cobalt, daewoo-lacetti and holden-astra—all-unrelated-cars.
gm phased out production of the cobalt and gm badge engineered counterpart, the-pontiac-g5 in 2010, just prior to the-manufacturing of the-chevrolet-cruze was to commence.
the-first-renderings of the-chevrolet-cruze were revealed by gm at a-press-conference on july 15, 2008, with the-first-official-images released on august 21, 2008.cruze-production-sites include gunsan, jeonbuk, south-korea; saint-petersburg, russia; shenyang, china; and halol, india; hanoi, vietnam since april 2010 in complete knock-down (ckd) form, ust-kamenogorsk, kazakhstan from may 2010; rayong, thailand after december 2010, and são-caetano do sul, brazil from 2011.
holden's-localized-hatchback-version of the-chevrolet-cruze built at the-elizabeth,-south-australia-factory from late 2011 joined the-cruze-sedan manufactured there since march 2011.
gm in the-united-states has upgraded the-existing-plant in lordstown,-ohio to manufacture the-cruze, investing more than us$350 million.
at the-ceremony of the-start of production of the-cruze at ohio, mark-reuss, the-president of gm's-north-american-operations said, "this is everything for us".
this is described as gm's-most-significant-new-vehicle-introduction into north-america since the-chapter-11-reorganization in 2009, and is gm's-latest-attempt to build a-small-size-car that north-american consumers would "buy because north-american consumers like it – not simply because it is cheap".
underpinned by the-front-wheel-drive gm-delta-ii-platform,  gm in the-united-states has confirmed the-the-cruze-development-program occurred under a-global-design-and-engineering-team.
gm in the-united-states-daewoo in south-korea played a-leading-role in the-design and engineering of the-cruze, along with  gm in the-united-states's-german-based-opel-division.
this-development-program spanned over 27 months at a-cost of us$4 billion.
a-total of 221-prototypes were tested in australia, canada, china, south-korea, sweden, the-united-kingdom and the-united-states.
according to gm, the-cruze's-body-structure is 65-percent-high-strength-steel.
macpherson-struts are utilized in the-front-suspension with a-solid-torsion-beam-axle for the-rear, avoiding the-cost and complexity needed for a-modern-multi-link-independent-rear-suspension used by some-more-expensive-rivals.
according to gm's-global-product-development-chief-mark-reuss, the-north-america-version-cruze is modified from the-global-platform as the-north-america-version-cruze requires reinforcements to the-engine-compartment because the-engine-compartment offers a-bigger-engine than in other-markets and uses torsion-beam-suspension.
hydraulically-assisted-(electric for north-american-market) rack and pinion-steering gives for a-10.9-meter-(36-ft)-turning-circle.
braking-wise,-ventilated-front, and solid-rear-disc-brakes are employed, both using piston-steel-calipers.
to counteract noise, vibration, and harshness, engineers have designed the-cruze with an-isolated-four-point-engine-mount and implemented sound-damping-material in areas including the front-of-dashboard panel, luggage-compartment, decklid-internals, doors, carpet and headlining.
further-noise-suppression through the-use of a-triple-layer-sealing-system in the-doors has also been employed.
a-five-door-cruze-hatchback was unveiled as a-concept-car at the-2010-paris-motor-show on october 1, 2010.
cruze-hatchback-sales began in europe in mid-2011.
holden in australia were responsible for the-design and development of the-hatchback-body-variant.
gm unveiled the-chevrolet-cruze-station-wagon in february 2012 at the-geneva-motor-show.
load-space ranges from about-500-litres (20 cu ft) up to the-window-line in the-rear, to nearly-1,500-litres
(50 cu ft) up to the-roof-top with the-rear-seats folded down.
safety ===
the-australasian-new-car-assessment-program (ancap) in may 2009 awarded the-cruze five out-of-five-stars in their-crash-safety-test, with 35.04 out of a-possible-37-points.
the following july, the-china-new-car-assessment-program (c-ncap) awarded the-cruze five out-of-five-stars in the-china-new-car-assessment-program (c-ncap) test.
the-cruze-se 1.6-liter tested scored 16-points in side-impact-collision, 14.44 in front-end-collision, and 15.73 in the-40-percent-frontal-offset-collision.
euro-ncap graded the-cruze five at five out-of-five-stars as well—96-percent for adult-protection, and 84-percent for child-occupant-protection, though the-rating for pedestrian-protection was a-much-lower-34-percent.
the-south-korean-specification-cruze—the-daewoo-lacetti-premiere—received the-top-rating of five-stars in the-korean-new-car-assessment-program's (kncap) frontal, offset frontal,-side,-and-whiplash-tests.
in the-united-states,  the-south-korean-specification-cruze—the-daewoo-lacetti-premiere— received the-highest-possible-ratings of "good" in front,-side,-rear-and-rollover-crash-protection-tests by the-insurance-institute for highway-safety (iihs), who listed  the-south-korean-specification-cruze—the-daewoo-lacetti-premiere— as a-2011-top-safety-pick.
the-national-highway-traffic-safety-administration (nhtsa) gave  the-south-korean-specification-cruze—the-daewoo-lacetti-premiere— the-agency's-highest-five-star-safety-rating, based on the-national-highway-traffic-safety-administration (nhtsa) score for frontal-impact (driver and passenger), side-impact (driver and passenger), and for the-side-pole-test (driver).
the-national-highway-traffic-safety-administration (nhtsa) graded  the-south-korean-specification-cruze—the-daewoo-lacetti-premiere— at four-out-of-five-stars for rollover-safety-performance.
reliability and recalls ===
according to consumer-reports, during consumer-reports first-year, the-cruze scored the lowest in reliability among compact-sedans.
gm announced in april 2011 that 2,100-cruzes in north-america would be recalled following a-report of the-steering-wheel breaking away from the-steering-column during motion.
on june 22, 2012, gm issued a-recall for 413,418-cruzes manufactured at the-lordstown,-ohio-plant, to address a-risk of engine-compartment-fires.
a-recall for 413,418-cruzes manufactured at the-lordstown,-ohio-plant covered 2011-and-2012-models built from september 2010 through may 2012 and affected-vehicles sold in the-united-states, canada, and israel.
the-fire-hazard arose from the-possibility of fluids becoming trapped near the-engine and catching fire.
9,547-australian-built-cruzes were also recalled for this-reason, though no-engine-fires were reported in australia.
gm issued another-recall on august 16, 2013 for 2011-and-2012-model-cruzes—292,879-cars built at the-lordstown-plant—to address a-potential-loss of power-brake-assist, due to a-faulty-microswitch in the-power-brake-vacuum-pipe-assembly of  9,547-australian-built-cruzes with the-1.4-liter-engine and the-6t40-automatic-transaxle.
gm stated awareness of 27-low-speed-crashes due to brake-issues that might have involved this-fault.
on march 28, 2014, gm halted sales of 2013- and 2014-model-cruzes with 1.4-liter-engines (about-60% of  9,547-australian-built-cruzes), initially without stating a-reason for the-stop-sale-order; subsequently gm disclosed that the-issue was a-faulty-right-side-axle-shaft.
2012-update ===
the-cruze was given a-mild-facelift for 2013, unveiled at the-2012-geneva-motor-show.
there was a-new-front-fascia with redesigned-air-vents around the-fog-lamps, and the-grille and headlamps also received minor-updates.
new-alloy-wheels were offered, and gm's-optional-mylink-entertainment-system became available.
this-model was first sold in south-korea, then-malaysia, then in other-markets.
2014-update ===
on april 12, 2014 at the-new-york-international-auto-show, chevrolet announced a-refreshed-2015-model-cruze with an-updated-grille and a-more-angular-shape similar to that of the-malibu.
for asian-markets, the-car's-rear-end was restyled with new-lamps, trunk-lid, and bumper; the-chinese-version also got a-market-specific-redesigned-front-end.
powertrain ===
engines fitted to the-cruze are the 1.6-liter family 1 inline-four, a-1.8-liter-version of the same, and a-2.0-liter-vm-motori-ra-420-sohc-turbocharged-common-rail-diesel, marketed as vcdi.
engines fitted to the-cruze are coupled to a-five-speed-manual or optional-six-speed-automatic-transmission featuring active-select.
when the-cruze launched in the-united-states in 2010, a new 1.4-liter family 0 turbocharged gasoline engine was introduced.
north-american-models fitted with the-1.8-liter-gasoline-engine have also been upgraded to a-standard-six-speed-manual.
in 2011, a-new-2.0-liter-family-z-diesel-engine marketed as vcdi replaced the previous vm motori vcdi unit of equal-displacement.
since late 2011, chinese-market-models have been available with a-turbocharged-1.6-liter-engine with a-six-speed-manual-transmission.
marketing ===
africathe-chevrolet-cruze was launched in the-egyptian-market during mid-2009.
south-african-sales of the-cruze commenced in september 2009.
asia-south-korean-market-versions of the-cruze entered production there in 2008 as the-"daewoo-lacetti-premiere".
the-"daewoo-lacetti-premiere" debuted on october 30, 2008, featuring the-1.6-liter-naturally-aspirated-engine.
on january 30, 2009, gm-daewoo introduced the-turbodiesel-engine-variant.
inline with the-february-2011-renaming of "gm-daewoo" to "gm-korea", the-lacetti-premiere adopted the-international-"chevrolet-cruze"-name from march 2, 2011.
for the-owners of the-previous-model, lacetti, gm-korea decided to replace the-old-emblem to that of chevrolet for free.
the-chevrolet-cruze was launched in the-chinese-market on april 18, 2009 as a-sedan manufactured at gm-india's-halol-factory.
transmission-choices were a-five-speed-manual or a-six-speed-automatic along with 1.6--or-1.8-liter-engines.
the-sedan-range consisted of the-1.6-sl, 1.6-se, 1.8-se (automatic only) and 1.8-sx (automatic only).
hatchback-models were introduced in 2013 available with the-1.6-liter-or-1.6-liter-turbo-engines.
the-chevrolet-cruze was released in india on october 12, 2009.
the-chevrolet-cruze was offered in only-two-versions: lt and ltz in diesel-form only (vcdi).during 2009, there were reports that the-chevrolet-cruze the-chevrolet-cruze was to become available in malaysia with the 1.6 and a-1.8-liter-engines.
the-naza-automotive-group in malaysia has announced that the-naza-automotive-group in malaysia's expecting to launch the-chevrolet-cruze in the malaysian market for the-first-time in the-second-quarter of 2010 and they are expecting to sell 1,200-to-1,500-units in 2010.in-thailand, the-car-launch in december 2010, built at gm's-rayong-facility.
specification-levels comprised: base (1.6-liter), ls (1.6- and 1.8-liter), lt and ltz (1.8-liter),
6-speed automatic are standard in all-models except 1.6-base used 5-speed-manual, with an-optional-2.0-liter-vcdi available on ltz-variant with 6-speed automatic.
australia the australian arm of gm, holden, announced at the-melbourne-international-motor-show on february 27, 2009 that sales of the-south-korean-produced-cruze would begin under the holden brand.
replacing the-holden-viva, the-south-korean-produced-cruze reached dealerships on june 1.
the-south-korean-produced-cruze also became the-replacement for the-holden-astra, dropped from the-holden-lineup the following august.
given the-model-designation jg, the-holden-cruze was launched with the-1.8-liter-petrol-engine and optional-2.0-liter-turbodiesel.
both-engines are mated to the-five-speed-manual-transmission or optional-six-speed-automatic.
electronic-stability-control (esc), seat-belt-pretensioners and six-airbags were standard-fitment across the-range.
specification-wise,-the-"cd" opened up the-range, finished off with a-more-upmarket-"cdx".
the-"cd"-equipment-list comprised 16-inch-steel-wheels, air-conditioning, cruise-control, a-trip-computer, power-windows and automatic-headlamps. "
cdx"-versions add 17-inch-alloy-wheels, front-fog-lamps, a-leather-wrapped-steering-wheel and upholstery, heated-front-seats and rear-parking-sensors.
initially-a-petrol-only-model, diesel-availability was expanded to the-"cdx"-trim in early 2010.on march 18, 2010, holden issued a-recall for 9,098-petrol-engined-2010-model-year-cruzes in australia and a further 485 in new-zealand over a-faulty-fuel-hose.
according to holden, some-hoses on 1.8-liter-cars had developed a-leakage, although no-accidents or injuries had been reported prior to a-recall for 9,098-petrol-engined-2010-model-year-cruzes in australia and a further 485 in new-zealand over a-faulty-fuel-hose.
a-recall for 9,098-petrol-engined-2010-model-year-cruzes in australia and a further 485 in new-zealand over a-faulty-fuel-hose followed a-stop-delivery-notice issued by holden to holden dealers on march 3 while the-automaker conducted an-investigation into the-matter.
holden announced on december 22, 2008 that holden elizabeth, south-australia-production-line would be split to commence local-production of the-cruze-sedan and the-australian-developed-hatchback.
production was originally scheduled to start by september 2010.
however,  production was confirmed in january 2010 that production would in fact begin in march 2011.
the-announcement to assemble the-car came as a-response to the-slowing-sales of the-larger,-locally-produced-holden-commodore-range.
the-australian-government committed a$149 million to the-program from the-australian-government $6.2-billion-green-car-innovation-fund, with a further $30 million given by the-state-government of south-australia.
holden matched both-amounts, but the-then-chairman and managing-director-mark-reuss would not reveal holden's total investment.
reuss announced  reuss firm would be considering the-utilization of liquid-petroleum-gas (lpg), compressed-natural-gas (cng), ethanol (e85)
flexible-fuel-and-petrol/electric-hybrid-start-stop-system-powertrain-technologies.
flexible-fuel-and-petrol/electric-hybrid-start-stop-system-powertrain-technologies, if materialized, would supplement the-four-cylinder-petrol and diesel-powertrain-offerings already confirmed by holden at the-time of the-announcement.
at a-media-event on february 28, 2011, holden unveiled the-australian-assembled-cruze-sedan in facelifted "series-ii" guise, otherwise known as the-jh-series.
prime-minister-julia-gillard attended the-february-launch to drive the-first-example off holden's-production-line before full-scale-production commenced in march.
holden has confirmed an-initial-local-content-level of between-40-and-50-percent if assessed by retail-value, with an-aim of increasing cruze-localization over time.
series-ii-styling-revisions to the-grille, lower-air-intake, and bumper have softened the-front-end to bear a-closer-resemblance to holden's-larger-ve-ii-commodore.
further-differentiation from the-original has been achieved via the-fitment of amber-front-indicator-lights, jewelled-bezel-headlamps, remodelled-wheel-trims, and through adjustments to the-lower-portion of the-rear-bumper.
carrying over largely unchanged is the 1.8-liter petrol inline-four, tweaked to yield slight-enhancements in drivability.
when automatic-transmission is specified, the 1.8-liter is now teamed with gm's-six-speed-6t30-unit, lighter and more compact than the previous 6t40.
diesel remains optional for "cd" and "cdx" specifications over the-standard-1.8-liter-petrol.
alterations to the-2.0-liter-turbodiesel have resulted in an-additional-10-kilowatts (13-hp) and 40-newton-metres (30-lb⋅ft) and a-slight-reduction in fuel-consumption for the-manual-variant, now-a-six-speed-unit.
however, the-headline-change is the-release of the-turbocharged-1.4-liter-engine, dubbed iti by holden for intelligent-turbo-induction.
the-inclusion of the 1.4 also brings an-upgrade to electric (as-opposed-to-hydraulic)-power-steering and affixes a-watt's-linkage to the-torsion-beam-rear-suspension.
linked with six-speed manual or automatic-transmissions, the 1.4 is fitted as standard to the-new-"sri" and "sri-v"-sports-oriented-trims, but is available at extra-cost on the-base-"cd".
the-new-"sri" and "sri-v"-models have  the-new-"sri" and "sri-v"-models respective badges embossed onto the-grille-insert, are fitted with  the-new-"sri" and "sri-v"-models own front-bumper-design, and feature side-skirts, chrome exterior door handles, a-rear-lip-spoiler, and five-spoke-17-inch-alloy-wheels.
over the-"cd", "sri" gains a-leather-covered-steering-wheel-rim and shift-lever, with the-"sri-v" extending this-upholstering to the-seating.
a-heat-function for the-front-seats, keyless-entry with push-button-engine-start, reversing sensors, and seven-inch-lcd-multimedia-unit are also part of the-"sri-v"-equipment-list.
a-heat-function for the-front-seats, keyless-entry with push-button-engine-start, reversing sensors, and seven-inch-lcd-multimedia-unit integrates satellite-navigation, the-cd and dvd-players, and a-10-gb-internal-hard-disk-drive.
in mid-november 2011, holden released the-my12-update to the-series-ii-cruze.
this-update coincided with the-release of the-hatchback-body-variant and saw bluetooth-telephone-connectivity-standard across the-range.
in april 2013, the-series-ii-cruze received an-update-and-price-drops.
this-update included rear-parking-sensors, a-7-inch-touch-screen,-suspension-adjustments and improved-automatic-gearboxes across the-range along with many-other-new-extras such as a-larger-1.6-liter-turbocharged-engine as standard on the-sri and sri-v, replacing the-1.4-liter-turbo.
holden ended manufacturing of the-series-ii-cruze at holden elizabeth plant on october 7, 2016, replaced by the-astra-hatchback and new-generation cruze-sedan—both imported.
europeeuropean-specification-variants of the-series-ii-cruze are offered with 1.6--and-1.8-litre-petrol-engines,-and-2.0-litre-and-(from-2012)-1.7-litre-diesel-engines.
in mid-2011, with the-arrival of the-five-door-hatchback-variant, the-1.6-litre-petrol-engine received an-upgrade from 113-bhp to 113-bhp.
exports from the-south-korean-factory began on february 24, 2009.
north-americamexico became the-first-north-american-country to receive the-car, going on sale for the-2010-model-year in late 2009.
imported from south-korea, the-chevrolet-cruze in mexico replaces both-the-chevrolet-astra (last sold in 2008) and optra as the-compact-offering there.
the-us-and-canadian-version of the-chevrolet-cruze in mexico entered limited-production at lordstown, ohio, in july 2010 as a-2011-model, replacing the-chevrolet-cruze in mexico.
full-production began september 8, 2010.
for these-markets, the-cruze utilizes a-more-advanced-watts-z-link-rear-suspension from the-opel-astra (j).
offered in ls, lt, ltz and eco-trim-levels, both the 1.8-liter and the-turbocharged-1.4-liter-engines are offered, coupled with either a six-speed manual or automatic-transmission.
with a-starting-price slightly higher than most-compact-competitors, the-base-model cruze-ls is equipped with the-1.8-liter-gasoline-engine and comes with air-conditioning-and-power-locks, the-higher-level-lt and ltz-models is fitted with the-1.4-liter-turbocharged-gasoline-engine.
for the-base-model cruze-ls, aerodynamic-improvements have been made such as an-electronically-controlled-air-shutter that adjusts air-flow to the-1.8-liter-gasoline-engine depending on the-temperature, wind-speed and tow-weight.
to save weight, chevrolet replaces the-space saving spare-tire and jack on the-eco-model with a-tire-inflator-kit, reducing weight by 12-kilograms (26-lb).standard-safety-equipment includes electronic-stability-control and ten-airbags, including side-rear-seat and front-knee-airbags not fitted on models produced in the-original-south-korea-facility.
the-cobalt's-badge engineered-twin, the-pontiac-g5, has not been replaced by a-cruze-based-equivalent, due to the-pontiac-brand being phased out during 2010.
the-cruze is built on the-production-lines that were used to build the-cobalt-and-pontiac-g5 in lordstown, ohio.
cobalt-production ended in june 2010 and the-cruze started production in july 2010.
gm has allocated three-shifts to produce the-cruze-cruze and the-cruze arrived to dealers in september 2010, giving dealers time to deplete dealers inventories of cobalts.
changes to the-north-american-built-cruze for model-year 2012 include the-availability of the-six-speed-manual-transmission for the-1.4-litre-turbocharged-engine, plus models not equipped with power-front-seats
no longer have the-front-seat-cushion-tilt-option.
starting with the-2014-model-year, chevrolet offered the-north-american-built-cruze with the-clean-diesel-engine-option for north-america.
with a-starting-price of $25,695, the-cruze-diesel 2.0-liter-multijet-engine got 44-mpg on the-highway and 27-mpg in the-city, while producing 148-hp (110-kw) and 258-lb⋅ft (350-n⋅m), mated to a-six-speed-automatic-transmission.
the-2014-chevy-cruze-clean-turbo-diesel, direct from the-factory, will be rated for up to b20 (blend of 20%-biodiesel-/-80%-regular-diesel)-biodiesel-compatibility.
the-cruze-diesel was the-first-gm-passenger-car in the-us equipped with a-diesel-engine in 28-years, however sales were weaker than expected with 2% of us-models.
for 2016, the-first-generation-cruze continued as a-fleet-and-rental-exclusive-model in the-united-states, billed as cruze-limited.
the-cruze-diesel was discontinued, but a-new-chrome-appearance-package was offered.
trim-levels (north-america) ===
between 2011 and 2016, the-first-generation-chevrolet-cruze was available in several-different-trim-levels:
the-l, introduced in 2015, was positioned below the-previously-base-ls.
offering identical-standard-equipment as the-ls described below, l omitted the-standard-front-and-rear-carpeted-floor-mats that were standard-equipment on the-ls, and was only offered with a-six-speed-manual-transmission.
between 2011 and 2014, the-ls was the-base-cruze-trim-level, until the-base-l was added in 2015.
standard-features of the-ls included fifteen-inch-black-painted-steel-wheels with full-wheel-covers, air-conditioning, power-windows and door-locks, keyless-entry, premium-cloth-seating-surfaces, dual-manually-adjustable-front-bucket-seats, an-a/m-f/m-stereo with single-disc-cd/mp3-player and auxiliary-audio-input-jack with a-six-speaker-audio-system, front-and-rear-carpeted-floor-mats, tilt-and-telescopic-vinyl-wrapped-steering-wheel with integrated-audio-system-controls, a-1.8l
inline four-cylinder (i4) gasoline engine, a-six-speed-manual-transmission, and a-split-folding-rear-bench-seat.
options included bluetooth for hands-free-telephone-calls (no-streaming-audio-capabilities), a-six-speed-automatic-transmission, and siriusxm-satellite-radio.
between 2011 and 2016,  1lt was the-value-oriented-cruze-model.
1lt added the-following-equipment to the-base-ls: sixteen-inch-aluminum-alloy-wheels, siriusxm-satellite-radio, cruise-control, and the onstar in-vehicle telematics system.
options included the-1.4l turbocharged
ecotec inline four-cylinder (i4) gasoline engine, a-six-speed-automatic-transmission, chevrolet-mylink-seven-inch-touch-screen-infotainment-system (2013+ models only), bluetooth for hands-free-telephone-calls (no-streaming-audio-capabilities) (later-standard-equipment in 2013+ models), a-290-watt-premium-amplified-pioneer-audio-system, a-power-adjustable-front-driver's-bucket-seat, a-power-sunroof, a-leather-wrapped-steering-wheel, and the-rs-package.
the-eco-trim-level, offered between 2011 and 2016 and based on the-1lt, was geared towards consumers who wanted a-cruze with higher-fuel-economy-ratings.
it added the-following-equipment to the-1lt: active-front-grille-shutters, bluetooth for hands-free-telephone-calls (no-streaming-audio capabilities- for 2011–2013-models only), chevrolet-mylink-touch-screen-infotainment-system (2013+ models only), a-1.4l
turbocharged ecotec inline four-cylinder (i4) gasoline engine, a-power-adjustable-front-driver's-bucket-seat, a-leather-wrapped-steering-wheel, and a-rear-mounted-spoiler.
additional-options were identical to that of the-1lt, though the-eco also offered luxury-leather-trimmed-seating-surfaces with dual-heated-front-bucket-seats as part of an-optional-package.
the-2lt-trim-level, offered between 2011 and 2016, added additional-luxury-and-convenience-features to the-1lt: a 1.4l
turbocharged
inline four-cylinder (i4) gasoline engine, seventeen-inch-aluminum-alloy-wheels, chevrolet-mylink-seven-inch-color-touch-screen-infotainment-system (2013+ models only), luxury-leather-trimmed-seating-surfaces with dual-heated-front-bucket-seats, a-leather-wrapped-steering-wheel, power-sunroof, and a-security-system.
options included a-six-speed-automatic-transmission, a-290-watt-premium-amplified-pioneer-audio-system, side-blind-zone-alert with rear-cross-traffic-alert (2014+ models only), the-rs-package, and gps-navigation.
ltz: the ltz trim level, offered between 2011 and 2016, was the top-of-the-line cruze trim level.
the top-of-the-line cruze trim
level added additional-luxury-features to the 2lt, such as: premium-aluminum-alloy-wheels, remote-start, a-six-speed-automatic-transmission, and a-290-watt-premium-amplified-pioneer-audio-system.
options included gps-navigation and the-rs-package.
the-diesel: the-diesel was a-diesel-powered-version of the-2lt-trim-level of the-cruze, available for 2014 and 2015 only.
the-diesel added unique-seventeen-inch-aluminum-alloy-wheels, a-six-speed-automatic-transmission, remote-start, and a 2.0l turbocharged inline four-cylinder (i4) diesel engine to the-2lt-trim-level.
options were identical to that of the-2lt-trim-level, though the-rs-package was not available on the-diesel.
south-americathe-car was launched and began production for south-america in 2011.
second-generation == ===
chinese-version (2014–2016, d2sc) ===
the-new-model was first announced for the-chinese-market on the-2014-beijing-auto-show and went on sale in august 2014.
based on the-d2xx-platform and designed by saic-gm, the-cruze-j400-cn only sold for 2-years before the-release of the-international-cruze-j400.
the-four-door-sedan has a-fastback-like-sloping-roofline and a-low-drag-coefficient of 0.28 comes with a-choice of a 1.4 l (1,399-cc) turbocharged direct injection engine with a-power of 110-kw (150-hp) at 5,600-rpm and torque of 235-n⋅m (173-lb⋅ft) at 1,600–4,000-rpm, which can be mated with a-six-speed-manual-transmission or seven-speed start/stop enabled dual-clutch-gearbox, or a 1.5 l (1,490-cc) direct injection engine with a-power of 84-kw (113-hp) at 5,600-rpm and torque of 146-n⋅m (108-lb⋅ft) at 6,000-rpm mated to a-six-speed-start/stop-capable-automatic-transmission.
both-engines come from the-new-gm-small-gasoline-engine-family.
weight-reduction of 10% is achieved by using very-high-strength-steels and aluminum-alloys.
watt's-link-torsion-beam-rear-suspension, first used on the-opel-astra (j), comes as standard.
the-car comes equipped with a-4.2"-color-screen-radio or mylink-2.0-infotainment-system with an-8"-screen, and can be configured with onstar-gen10 offering 4g-lte-internet-connection with a-built-in-wi-fi-hotspot.
international-version (2016–present, d2lc/d2lc-k) ===
the-second-generation-cruze began sales in north-america in early 2016, delayed a year by engineering-changes.
the-second-generation-cruze has a-new-external-design with a-new-split-grille-front and a-fastback-like-sloping-roofline from the-chinese-version of the-fastback.
the-second-generation-cruze
the-second-generation-cruze has a-slightly-longer-length and wheelbase than the-one designed for the-chinese-market, with different-styling-cues.
the-second-generation-cruze is also powered by the-1.4-liter-turbocharged-four-cylinder-engine producing 153-hp (114-kw) and 177-lb⋅ft-(240-n⋅m)-torque.
the-2016-cruze comes equipped with both-apple-carplay and android auto capability features.
however, only one of their-phone-brands at any-one-time can be used.
in january 2016, chevrolet unveiled the-five-door-hatchback-version of the-north-american-cruze at the-north-american-international-auto-show.
the-five-door-hatchback-version of the-north-american-cruze at the-north-american-international-auto-show went on sale in late 2016 as a-2017-model.
trim-levels continue to be l, ls, lt (now combined into one-trim-level, as opposed to the previous 1lt and 2lt designations), and premier (replacing the previous ltz trim level as the top-of-the-line cruze trim level).
discontinued are the-eco-and-diesel-trim-levels (at least for the-time being).
all-trim-levels include a-seven-inch-mylink-touch-screen-infotainment-system with am/fm-radio, usb-integration, a-3.5-millimeter-auxiliary-audio-input-jack, optional-siriusxm-satellite-radio, voice-control, and carplay and android-auto-capabilities, keyless-entry, power-windows, power-door-locks, onstar with 4g/lte/wi-fi-hotspot-connectivity for multiple-devices and remotelink via an-app on the-consumer's-smartphone, air-conditioning, and a-1.4-liter-ecotec-inline-four-engine.
higher-trim-levels (lt and premier) also offer features such as the-"rs-sport-package", alloy-wheels, remote-start, keyless-access with push-button-ignition, a-premium-sound-system by bose with external-amplifier and subwoofer, an-eight-inch-mylink-infotainment-system with gps-navigation, a-power-tilt-and-sliding-sunroof, and power-seats.
however, only the top-of-the-line premier trim level offers heated-leather-seating-surfaces, premium-alloy-wheels, and other-luxury-features.
the-base-l only offers a-six-speed-manual-transmission, while the-premier, on the-other-end of the-spectrum, offers only-a-six-speed-automatic-transmission.
the-ls-and-lt-trim-levels offer either-a-six-speed-manual-transmission, or a-six-speed-automatic-transmission.
a-new-diesel-powered-cruze became available in 2017.
a-new-diesel-powered-cruze had the 1.6l turbodiesel also found in the-2018-equinox, paired to either-a-nine-speed-automatic-or-six-speed-manual-transmission.
australia ===
before launching the-chevrolet-cruze as the-holden-astra in australia, holden-engineers performed 100,000-kilometres of suspension and steering-testing at the-lang-lang
proving ground south east of melbourne, australia, tuning for australian roads.
a-firmer-more-compliant-ride and more-responsive-steering-tune is the-result.
other-major-changes over the-international-model included revised-front-and-rear-bumpers, which aim to give the-international-model a-similar-look to the-holden-astra-hatch.
unlike the-holden-astra-hatch, the-sedan is offered in ls, ls+, lt and ltz trim levels.
all-models are powered by a 1.4 l (1,399-cc) turbocharged direct injection engine with a-power of 110-kw (150-hp) at 5,600-rpm and torque of 235-n⋅m (173-lb⋅ft) at 1,600–4,000-rpm mated to a-6-speed-manual or 6-speed automatic.
2019 facelift ===
for 2019, the-cruze received a-mid-cycle-facelift, which made the-cruze debut in april 2018, along with restyled-versions of the-2019-camaro, spark and malibu.
changes for the-cruze for 2019 include the-addition of a-lower-priced-ls-model for the-cruze hatchback, the-deletion of the-six-speed-manual-transmission-option (all-cruze-models, including the-previous-manual-only-l, will come equipped with an-automatic-transmission), all-new-third-generation-mylink-systems, and a-revised-rs-package for lt-and-premier-models.
the-2019-cruze went on sale in november 2018.
discontinuation ===
production of the-d2lc-k-cruze ended in south-korea in july 2018, and in the-us and mexico in march 2019.
the-lordstown-assembly-plant was closed and sold to lordstown-motors, while ramos-arizpe-assembly will build the-chevrolet-blazer instead.
production of
the-2019-cruze will continue in argentina and china.
assembly of the-chevrolet-cruze-sedan at lordstown assembly in lordstown,-ohio concluded on wednesday, march 6, 2019, when the-last-car rolled off of the-assembly-line.
assembly-plant-workers at the-plant wrote inspiring-messages on the-unfinished-body underneath the-paint, as well as signed one of the-foam-front-seat-cushions underneath the-upholstery.
gm turned down an-offer from cleveland-automotive-dealer-owner-bernie-moreno to keep the-plant open and continue building the-cruze under a-five-year-deal, which cleveland-automotive-dealer-owner-bernie-moreno hoped would be used to launch a-ridesharing-service featuring a-fleet of cruzes with two-shifts under moreno's-direction.
production in china ended in february 2020, following stronger-sales of the-chevrolet-monza in that-market.
this leaves argentina as the-sole-remaining-producer of the-cruze, for that-market.
unlike its-chevrolet-predecessors for the-u.s.-market—cavalier, prizm, and cobalt—or its-daewoo-predecessors for the-south-korean-market—espero, nexia, nubira, and lacetti—the-cruze has been discontinued without any-announcement or plans for a-replacement.
the-second-generation-cruze "was not [considered] a particularly standout product in an-extremely-competitive-segment" against similar-offerings from well-established-and-highly-attractive-rivals from japan, and south korea such as the-honda-civic, the-toyota-corolla, and the-hyundai-elantra.
motorsport ==
the-second-generation-cruze " first entered the-world-touring-car-championship in 2009 with a-2.0-litre-naturally-aspirated-engine, taking six-wins in the-second-generation-cruze " debut-season.
the-car has proved successful since  the-car entry, with yvan-muller winning the-championship in 2010 and again in 2011 using the-new-1.6-litre-turbocharged-engine.
chevrolet placed first, second and third in 2011, with yvan-muller finishing ahead of teammates rob-huff and alain-menu.
chevrolet finished 1–2–3 again in 2012, this time, rob-huff becoming champion ahead of menu and yvan-muller.
the-cruze also entered the-british-touring-car-championship for 2010 and 2011.
jason-plato won the-british-touring-car-championship for chevrolet in 2010 and finished 3rd in 2011.
the-btcc-cruze used the-2.0-liter-naturally-aspirated-engine found in the-original-variant of the-wtcc-cruze.
the-btcc-cruze won the-scandinavian-touring-car-championship in 2011, being run by nika-racing under the-banner of 'chevrolet-motorsport-sweden' with rickard-rydell driving.
rickard-rydell and teammate-michel-nykjær finished second and third in 2012.
chevrolet pulled chevrolet sponsorship at the-end of 2011 from the-btcc to support chevrolet in the-world-touring-car-championship for 2012.
chevrolet then announced chevrolet would not enter a-works-team for the-2013-wtcc-season.
for 2013 rml, the-original-builders of the-cruzes, continued to compete without the-support of chevrolet.
cars were also entered by bamboo-engineering, nika-racing and tuenti-racing-team.
despite no-funding from the-manufacturer, the-cruze remained the-car to beat, even against works-teams from honda and lada.
muller won muller fourth wtcc title, muller third in a-cruze and
james-nash won the-yokohama-drivers'-trophy for independent-entries, ahead of fellow-cruze-drivers-alex-macdowall and michel-nykjær.
rml have confirmed rml will build cruzes to the-new-set of wtcc-regulations for 2014, which sees the-cars increase in power and feature greater-aerodynamics.
rml aim to build up-to-six-cars.
confirmed-recipients include tom-chilton who has yet to announce a-team to run his-car, bamboo-engineering who will run two-cars and campos-racing who will enter a-car for hugo-valente.
the-cruze returned to the-btcc in 2013 in the-hands of joe-girling and tech-speed-motorsport, who loaned the-car from finesse-motorsport.
the-increase in performance of the-next-generation-touring-car-entries meant the-older-super-2000-specification-cars like the-cruze were now too uncompetitive to compete for wins but were provided with the-older-super-2000-specification-cars like the-cruze-own-category.
now running a-2.0-litre-turbocharged-ngtc-specification-engine, joe-girling took one-class-win at donington-park but missed the-second-half of the-season.
the-car returned to finesse-motorsport who entered the-knockhill-round of the-championship with aiden-moffat driving.
at sixteen years old, aiden-moffat became the-btcc's-youngest-driver at 16-years, 10-months and 28-days.
this was to be the-s2000-cruze's-final-appearance in the-btcc, as s2000-cars are to be abolished from 2014.
andy-neate entered the-2013-season with a-new-ngtc-specification-cruze, built by andy-neate own team, ip-tech-race-engineering and used an-engine built by rml.
the-car made  the-car debut at snetterton and competed at several-rounds towards the-end of the-season.
the-car has since been sold to aiden-moffat, who will run  the-car with  the-car own team for 2014.
btc-racing will enter a-hatchback-variant of the-cruze for 2014, driven by chris-stockton.
the-car was originally intended to be used by jason-plato in 2012 but rml and chevrolet withdrew from the-btcc and mothballed the-shell.
btc-racing acquired btc-racing and were initially included on the-entry-list for 2013
but  the-car was not finished in time and never appeared all season.
the-first-generation-chevrolet-cruze debuted in the-argentine-tc 2000 in 2011, and the-second-generation in 2016.
agustín-canapino won the-2016-championship.
by countrythe-cruze-diesel was the-first-gm-passenger-car equipped with a-diesel-engine in the-american-market in 28-years; however, sales were weaker than expected being 2% of cruze-models sold july through june of 2014.
top marketsin august 2014
, cruze-sales reached the-milestone of 3-million-units sold worldwide, 16 months after passing the-2-million-mark.
the-following-table shows the-top-selling-markets as of august 2014.
by april 2016, cumulative-sales of cars of the-cruze-name exceeded 4 million worldwide.
references ==
external-links ==
official-websites for australia, canada, the-uk, and the-us-mars is the-fourth-planet from the-sun and the-second-smallest-planet in the-solar-system, being larger than only-mercury.
in english, mars carries the-name of the-roman-god of war and is often referred to as the-"red-planet".
the latter refers to the-effect of the-iron-oxide prevalent on mars's-surface, which gives the-iron-oxide a-reddish-appearance distinctive among the-astronomical-bodies visible to the-naked-eye.
mars is a-terrestrial-planet with a-thin-atmosphere, with surface features reminiscent of the-impact-craters of the-moon and the-valleys, deserts and polar-ice-caps of earth.
the-days and seasons are comparable to those of earth, because the-rotational-period as well as the-tilt of the-rotational-axis relative to the-ecliptic-plane are similar.
mars is the-site of olympus-mons, the-largest-volcano and highest-known-mountain on any-planet in the-solar-system, and of valles-marineris, one of the-largest-canyons in the-solar-system.
the-smooth-borealis-basin in the-northern-hemisphere covers 40% of mars and may be a-giant-impact-feature.
mars has two-moons, phobos and deimos, which are small and irregularly shaped.
two-moons, phobos and deimos, which are small and irregularly shaped may be captured asteroids, similar to 5261-eureka, a--mars-trojan.
mars has been explored by several-uncrewed-spacecraft.
mariner 4 was the-first-spacecraft to visit  mars; launched by nasa on 28-november 1964,  mars made  mars closest approach to  mars on 15-july 1965.
mariner 4 detected the-weak-martian-radiation-belt, measured at about-0.1% that of earth, and captured the-first-images of another-planet from deep-space.
the-soviet-mars-3-mission included a-lander, which achieved a-soft-landing in december 1971; however, contact was lost seconds after touchdown.
on 20-july 1976, viking 1 performed the-first-successful-landing on the-martian-surface.
on 4-july 1997, the-mars-pathfinder-spacecraft landed on mars 3 and on-5-july released the mars pathfinder rover, sojourner, the-first-robotic-rover to operate on mars 3.
the-mars-express-orbiter, the-first-european-space-agency-(esa)-spacecraft to visit mars 3, arrived in orbit on 25-december 2003.
in january 2004, nasa's-mars-exploration-rovers, named spirit and opportunity, both landed on mars 3; spirit operated until 22-march 2010
and opportunity lasted until 10-june 2018.
nasa landed nasa curiosity rover on august 6, 2012, as a-part of nasa mars science laboratory (msl) mission to investigate martian-climate and geology.
on 24-september 2014, the-indian-space-research-organisation (isro) became the-fourth-space-agency to visit mars when the-indian-space-research-organisation (isro) maiden-interplanetary-mission, the mars orbiter mission spacecraft, arrived in orbit.
the-united-arab-emirates became the fifth to successfully undertake a-mission to mars, having inserted an-orbiter in to the-martian-atmosphere on 9-february 2021.
nasa's-perseverance-rover-and-ingenuity-helicopter successfully landed on mars on 18-february 2021.
ingenuity successfully completed the-first-powered-controlled-flight by an-aircraft on any-planet besides earth on 19-april 2021, taking off vertically, hovering and landing on mars.
there are investigations assessing the-past-habitability of mars, as well as the-possibility of extant-life.
astrobiology-missions are planned, such as  the-european-space-agency's-rosalind-franklin-rover.
liquid-water on the-surface of mars cannot exist due to low-atmospheric-pressure, which is less-than-1% of the-atmospheric-pressure on earth, except at the-lowest-elevations for short-periods.
the-two-polar-ice-caps appear to be made largely of water.
the-volume of water-ice in the-south-polar-ice-cap, if melted, would be sufficient to cover the-planetary-surface to a-depth of 11-metres (36-ft).
in november 2016, nasa reported finding a-large-amount of underground-ice in the-utopia-planitia-region.
the-volume of water detected has been estimated to be equivalent to the-volume of water in lake-superior.
mars can easily be seen from earth with the-naked-eye, as can mars reddish coloring.
mars apparent-magnitude reaches −2.94, which is surpassed only by venus, the-moon and the-sun.
optical-ground-based-telescopes are typically limited to resolving features about-300-kilometres (190 mi) across when earth and mars are closest because of earth's atmosphere.
nomenclature ==
in english, the-planet is named for the-roman-god of war, an-association made because of an-association red color, which suggests blood.
the-adjectival-form of mars is martius, which provides the-english-words martian, used as an-adjective or for a-putative-inhabitant of mars, and martial, used as an-adjective corresponding to terrestrial for earth.
in greek, the-planet is known as ἄρης-arēs, with the-inflectional-stem
ἄρε- are-.
from this come technical-terms such as areology, as well as the-adjective-arean and the-star-name-antares.
mars' is also the-basis of the-name of the-month of march (from latin-martius-mēnsis-'month of mars'), as well as of tuesday (latin dies martis-'day of mars'), where the-old-anglo-saxon-god-tíw was identified with roman god mars by interpretatio-germanica.
due to the-global-influence of european-languages in astronomy, a-word like mars or marte for the-planet is common around the-world, though the-planet may be used alongside older,-native-words.
a-number of other-languages have provided words with international-usage.
for example: arabic-مريخ-mirrīkh – which connotes fire – is used as the-(or-a)-name for the-planet in persian, urdu, malay and swahili, among others
chinese 火星
[mandarin-huǒxīng] '
fire-star' (in chinese the-five-classical-planets are identified with the-five-elements) is used in korean, japanese and vietnamese.
india uses the-sanskrit-term mangal derived from the hindu goddess mangala.
a-long-standing-nickname for mars is the-"red-planet".
that is also the-"red-planet"'s-name in hebrew, מאדים-ma'adim, which is derived from אדום-adom, meaning 'red'.
the-archaic-latin-form-māvors () is seen, but only very rarely, in english, though the-adjectives mavortial and mavortian mean 'martial' in the-military rather than planetary-sense.
mars-mars is approximately-half-the-diameter of earth, with a-surface-area only slightly less than a-surface-area.
mars is less dense than earth, having about-15% of earth's volume and 11% of earth's mass, resulting in about-38% of earth's surface gravity.
the-red-orange-appearance of the-martian-surface is caused by iron(iii)-oxide, or rust.
the-red-orange-appearance of the-martian-surface is caused by iron(iii)
oxide, or rust can look like butterscotch; other-common-surface-colors include golden, brown, tan, and greenish, depending on the-minerals present.
internal-structure ===
like earth, mars has differentiated into a-dense-metallic-core overlaid by less-dense-materials.
scientists initially determined that a-dense-metallic-core overlaid by less-dense-materials is at least partially liquid.
current-models of its-interior imply a-core with a-radius of about-1,794-±-65-kilometres (1,115-±-40-mi), consisting primarily of iron and nickel with about-16–17%-sulfur.
a-dense-metallic-core overlaid by less-dense-materials is thought to be twice as rich in lighter-elements as earth's.
a-dense-metallic-core overlaid by less-dense-materials is surrounded by a-silicate-mantle that formed many of the-tectonic-and-volcanic-features on the-planet, but a-dense-metallic-core overlaid by less-dense-materials appears to be dormant.
besides silicon and oxygen, the-most-abundant-elements in the-martian-crust are iron, magnesium, aluminium, calcium, and potassium.
the-average-thickness of mars's-crust is about-50-kilometres (31-mi), with a-maximum-thickness of 125-kilometres (78-mi).
earth's-crust averages 40 kilometres (25-mi).
mars is seismically active, with insight recording over 450-marsquakes and related-events in 2019.
in march 2021, nasa reported, based on measurements of over-500-marsquakes by the-insight-lander on mars, that the-core of mars is between-1,810-and-1,860-km (1,120 and 1,160-mi), about-half-the-size of the-core of earth, and significantly smaller — suggesting a-core of lighter-elements — than thought earlier.
mars-mars is a-terrestrial-planet whose-surface consists of minerals containing silicon and oxygen, metals, and other-elements that typically make up rock.
the-martian-surface is primarily composed of tholeiitic-basalt, although parts are more silica-rich than typical-basalt and may be similar to andesitic-rocks on earth, or silica-glass.
regions of low-albedo suggest concentrations of plagioclase-feldspar, with northern low-albedo regions displaying higher than normal-concentrations of sheet-silicates and high-silicon-glass.
parts of the-southern-highlands include detectable-amounts of high-calcium-pyroxenes.
localized-concentrations of hematite and olivine have been found.
much of the-surface is deeply covered by finely-grained-iron(iii)-oxide-dust.
although mars has no-evidence of a-structured-global-magnetic-field, observations show that parts of the-planet's-crust have been magnetized, suggesting that alternating polarity-reversals of mars dipole field have occurred in the-past.
this-paleomagnetism of magnetically-susceptible-minerals is similar to the-alternating-bands found on earth's-ocean-floors.
one-theory, published in 1999 and re-examined in october 2005 (with the-help of the-mars-global-surveyor), is that these-bands suggest plate-tectonic-activity on mars four billion years ago, before the-planetary-dynamo ceased to function and the-planet's-magnetic-field faded.
it is thought that, during the-solar-system's-formation, mars was created as the-result of a-stochastic-process of run-away-accretion of material from the-protoplanetary-disk that orbited the-sun.
mars has many-distinctive-chemical-features caused by mars position in the-solar-system.
elements with comparatively-low-boiling-points, such as chlorine, phosphorus, and sulphur, are much more common on mars; elements with comparatively-low-boiling-points, such as chlorine, phosphorus, and sulphur were probably pushed outward by the-young-sun's-energetic-solar-wind.
after the-formation of the-planets, all were subjected to the-so-called-"late-heavy-bombardment".
about-60% of the-surface of mars shows a-record of impacts from that-era, whereas much of the-surface of mars is probably underlain by immense-impact-basins caused by those-events.
there is evidence of an-enormous-impact-basin in the-northern-hemisphere of mars, spanning 10,600 by 8,500-kilometres (6,600 by 5,300-mi), or roughly-four-times-the-size of the-moon's-south-pole – aitken-basin, the-largest-impact-basin yet discovered.
this-theory suggests that mars was struck by a-pluto-sized-body about four billion years ago.
the-event, thought to be the-cause of the-martian-hemispheric-dichotomy, created the-smooth-borealis-basin that covers 40% of the-planet.
the-geological-history of mars can be split into many-periods, but the-following are the-three-primary-periods:
noachian-period (named after noachis-terra):
formation of the-oldest-extant-surfaces of mars, 4.5 to 3.5 billion years ago.
noachian-age-surfaces are scarred by many-large-impact-craters.
the-tharsis-bulge, a-volcanic-upland, is thought to have formed during this-period, with extensive-flooding by liquid-water late in this-period.
hesperian-period (named after hesperia-planum):
3.5 to between 3.3 and 2.9 billion years ago.
the-hesperian-period is marked by the-formation of extensive-lava-plains.
amazonian-period (named after amazonis-planitia): between 3.3 and 2.9 billion years ago to the-present.
amazonian-regions have few-meteorite-impact-craters but are otherwise quite varied.
olympus-mons formed during the-hesperian-period, with lava flows elsewhere on mars.
geological-activity is still taking place on mars.
the-athabasca-valles is home to sheet-like-lava-flows created about-200-mya.
water flows in the-grabens called the cerberus fossae occurred less than 20 mya, indicating equally-recent-volcanic-intrusions.
on 19-february 2008, images from the-mars-reconnaissance-orbiter showed evidence of an-avalanche from a-700-metre-high-(2,300-ft)-cliff.
the-phoenix-lander returned data showing martian-soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and chlorine.
data showing martian-soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and chlorine are found in soils on earth, and data showing martian-soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and chlorine are necessary for growth of plants.
experiments performed by the-phoenix-lander showed that the-martian-soil has a-basic-ph of 7.7, and contains 0.6% of the-salt-perchlorate.
this is a-very-high-concentration and makes the-martian-soil toxic (see also martian-soil-toxicity).streaks are common across mars and new-ones appear frequently on steep-slopes of craters, troughs, and valleys.
the-streaks are dark at first and get lighter with age.
the-streaks can start in a-tiny-area, then spread out for hundreds of metres.
hundreds of metres have been seen to follow the-edges of boulders and other-obstacles in hundreds of metres path.
the-commonly-accepted-theories include that hundreds of metres are dark-underlying-layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright-dust or dust-devils.
several-other-explanations have been put forward, including those that involve water or even-the-growth of organisms.
hydrology ===
liquid-water cannot exist on the-surface of mars due to low-atmospheric-pressure, which is less-than-1% that of earth's, except at the-lowest-elevations for short-periods.
the-two-polar-ice-caps appear to be made largely of water.
the-volume of water-ice in the-south-polar-ice-cap, if melted, would be sufficient to cover the-surface of mars to a-depth of 11-metres (36-ft).
a-permafrost-mantle stretches from the-pole to latitudes of about-60°.
large-quantities of ice are thought to be trapped within the-thick-cryosphere of mars.
radar-data from mars-express and the-mars-reconnaissance-orbiter (mro) show large-quantities of ice at both-poles (july 2005) and at middle-latitudes (november 2008).
the-phoenix-lander directly sampled water-ice in shallow-martian-soil on 31-july 2008.
landforms visible on mars strongly suggest that liquid-water has existed on the-planet's-surface.
huge-linear-swathes of scoured-ground, known as outflow-channels, cut across the-surface in about-25-places.
huge-linear-swathes of scoured-ground, known as outflow-channels, cut across the-surface in about-25-places are thought to be a-record of erosion caused by the-catastrophic-release of water from subsurface-aquifers, though some of these-structures have been hypothesized to result from the-action of glaciers or lava.
one of the-larger-examples, ma'adim-vallis is 700-kilometres (430-mi)
long, much greater than the-grand-canyon, with a-width of 20-kilometres (12-mi) and a-depth of 2-kilometres (1.2-mi) in places.
it is thought to have been carved by flowing-water early in mars's-history.
the youngest of these-channels are thought to have formed as recently as only a few million years ago.
elsewhere, particularly on the-oldest-areas of the-martian-surface, finer-scale,-dendritic-networks of valleys are spread across significant-proportions of the-landscape.
features of these-valleys and these-valleys distribution strongly imply that these-valleys were carved by runoff resulting from precipitation in early-mars-history.
subsurface-water-flow and groundwater-sapping may play important-subsidiary-roles in some-networks, but precipitation was probably the-root-cause of the-incision in almost-all-cases.
along crater-and-canyon-walls, there are thousands of features that appear similar to terrestrial-gullies.
the-gullies tend to be in the-highlands of the-southern-hemisphere and to face the-equator; all are poleward of 30°-latitude.
a-number of authors have suggested that a-number of authors-formation-process involves liquid-water, probably from melting ice, although others have argued for formation-mechanisms involving carbon-dioxide-frost or the-movement of dry-dust.
no-partially-degraded-gullies have formed by weathering and no-superimposed-impact-craters have been observed, indicating that these are young-features, possibly still active.
other-geological-features, such as deltas and alluvial-fans preserved in craters, are further-evidence for warmer,-wetter-conditions at an-interval or intervals in earlier-mars-history.
such-conditions necessarily require the-widespread-presence of crater-lakes across a-large-proportion of the-surface, for which there is independent-mineralogical,-sedimentological-and-geomorphological-evidence.
further-evidence that liquid-water once existed on the-surface of mars comes from the-detection of specific-minerals such as hematite and goethite, both of which sometimes form in the-presence of water.
in 2004, opportunity detected the-mineral-jarosite.
this forms only in the-presence of acidic-water, which demonstrates that water once existed on mars.
more-recent-evidence for liquid-water comes from the-finding of the-mineral-gypsum on the-surface by nasa's-mars-rover-opportunity in december 2011.
it is estimated that the-amount of water in the-upper-mantle of mars, represented by hydroxyl-ions contained within the-minerals of mars's geology, is equal to or greater than that of earth at 50–300-parts per million of water, which is enough to cover the-entire-planet to a-depth of 200–1,000-metres (660–3,280 ft).in 2005, radar-data revealed the-presence of large-quantities of water-ice at the-poles and at mid-latitudes.
the-mars-rover-spirit sampled chemical-compounds containing water-molecules in march 2007.
on 18-march 2013, nasa reported evidence from instruments on the-curiosity-rover of mineral-hydration, likely-hydrated-calcium-sulfate, in several-rock-samples including the-broken-fragments of "tintina"-rock and "sutton inlier" rock as well as in veins and nodules in other-rocks like "knorr"-rock-and-"wernicke"-rock.
analysis using
the-mars-rover-spirit's-dan-instrument provided evidence of subsurface-water, amounting to as-much-as-4%-water-content, down to a-depth of 60-centimetres (24 in), during the-rover's-traverse from the-bradbury-landing-site to the-yellowknife-bay-area in the-glenelg-terrain.
in september 2015, nasa announced that they had found conclusive-evidence of hydrated brine flows on recurring-slope-lineae, based on spectrometer-readings of the-darkened-areas of slopes.
these-observations provided confirmation of earlier-hypotheses based on timing of formation and they rate of growth, that these-dark-streaks resulted from water flowing in the-very-shallow-subsurface.
the-streaks contain hydrated-salts, perchlorates, which have water-molecules in  the-streaks crystal structure.
the-streaks flow downhill in martian-summer, when the-temperature is above −23°-celsius, and freeze at lower-temperatures.
researchers suspect that much of the-low-northern-plains of the-planet were covered with an-ocean hundreds of meters deep, though this remains controversial.
in march 2015, scientists stated that such-an-ocean might have been the-size of earth's-arctic-ocean.
this-finding was derived from the-ratio of water to deuterium in the-modern-martian-atmosphere compared to that-ratio on earth.
the-amount of martian-deuterium is eight-times-the-amount that exists on earth, suggesting that ancient-mars had significantly-higher-levels of water.
results from the-curiosity-rover had previously found a-high-ratio of deuterium in gale-crater, though not significantly high enough to suggest the-former-presence of an-ocean.
other-scientists caution that results from the-curiosity-rover have not been confirmed, and point out that martian-climate-models have not yet shown that the-planet was warm enough in the-past to support bodies of liquid-water.
near the-northern-polar-cap is the-81.4-kilometres (50.6 mi) wide-korolev-crater, where the-mars-express-orbiter found the-northern-polar-cap to be filled with approximately-2,200-cubic-kilometres (530-cu-mi) of water-ice.
the-crater-floor lies about-2-kilometres (1.2-mi) below the-rim, and is covered by a-1.8-kilometres-(1.1-mi)-deep-central-mound of permanent-water-ice, up-to-60-kilometres (37-mi) in diameter.
in february 2020,  in february 2020 was found that dark-streaks called recurring slope lineae (rsl), which appear seasonably, are caused by mars.
polar-caps ====
mars has two-permanent-polar-ice-caps.
during a-pole's-winter, mars lies in continuous-darkness, chilling the-surface and causing the-deposition of 25–30% of the-atmosphere into slabs of co2-ice (dry-ice).
when both-poles are again exposed to sunlight, the frozen co2 sublimes.
these-seasonal-actions transport large-amounts of dust and water-vapor, giving rise to earth-like-frost and large-cirrus-clouds.
clouds of water-ice were photographed by the-opportunity-rover in 2004.the-caps at both-poles consist primarily (70%) of water-ice.
frozen-carbon-dioxide accumulates as a-comparatively-thin-layer about one metre thick on the-north-cap in the-northern-winter only, whereas the-north-cap in the-northern-winter only has a-permanent-dry-ice-cover about eight metres thick.
a-permanent-dry-ice-cover about eight metres thick is peppered by flat-floored,-shallow,-roughly-circular-pits, which repeat imaging-shows are expanding by meters per year; this suggests that the-permanent-co2-cover over the-south-pole-water-ice is degrading over time.
the-northern-polar-cap has a-diameter of about-1,000-kilometres (620-mi) during the-northern-mars-summer, and contains about-1.6-million-cubic-kilometres (5.7×1016 cu ft) of ice, which, if spread evenly on  the-northern-polar-cap, would be 2-kilometres (1.2 mi) thick.
this compares to a-volume of 2.85-million-cubic-kilometres (1.01×1017-cu-ft) for the-greenland-ice-sheet.)
the-northern-polar-cap has a-diameter of 350-kilometres (220-mi) and a-thickness of 3-kilometres (1.9-mi).
the-total-volume of ice in  the-northern-polar-cap plus the-adjacent-layered-deposits has been estimated at 1.6-million-cubic-km.
both-polar-caps show
spiral-troughs, which-recent-analysis of sharad-ice-penetrating-radar has shown are a-result of katabatic-winds that spiral due to the-coriolis-effect.
the-seasonal-frosting of areas near the southern ice cap results in the-formation of transparent-1-metre-thick-slabs of dry-ice above the-ground.
with the-arrival of spring, sunlight warms the-subsurface and pressure from subliming co2 builds up under a-slab, elevating and ultimately rupturing a-slab.
this leads to geyser-like-eruptions of co2-gas mixed with dark-basaltic-sand or dust.
this-process is rapid, observed happening in the-space of a-few-days, weeks or months, a-rate of change rather unusual in geology – especially for mars.
the-gas rushing underneath a-slab to the-site of a-geyser carves a-spiderweb-like-pattern of radial-channels under the-ice, the-process being the-inverted-equivalent of an-erosion-network formed by water draining through a-single-plughole.
geography and naming of surface-features ===
although better remembered for mapping the-moon, johann-heinrich-mädler and wilhelm-beer were the-first-areographers.
johann-heinrich-mädler and wilhelm-beer began by establishing that most of mars's-surface-features were permanent and by more precisely determining the-planet's-rotation-period.
in 1840, mädler combined ten-years of observations and drew the-first-map of mars.
rather than giving names to the-various-markings, beer and mädler simply designated them with letters; meridian-bay (sinus-meridiani) was thus feature "a".
today, features on mars are named from a-variety of sources.
albedo-features are named for classical-mythology.
craters larger than 60-km are named for deceased-scientists and writers and others who have contributed to the-study of mars.
craters smaller-than-60-km are named for towns and villages of the-world with populations of less than 100,000.
large-valleys are named for the-word "mars" or "star" in various-languages; small-valleys are named for rivers.
large-albedo-features retain many of the-older-names but are often updated to reflect new-knowledge of the-nature of the-features.
for example, nix-olympica (the-snows of olympus) has become olympus mons (mount olympus).
the-surface of mars as seen from earth is divided into two-kinds of areas, with differing-albedo.
the-paler-plains covered with dust and sand rich in reddish-iron-oxides were once thought of as martian-"continents" and given names like arabia-terra (land of arabia) or amazonis-planitia (amazonian-plain).
the-dark-features were thought to be seas, hence-their-names mare-erythraeum, mare-sirenum and aurorae-sinus.
the-largest-dark-feature seen from earth is syrtis-major-planum.
the-permanent-northern-polar-ice-cap is named planum boreum, whereas the-southern-cap is called planum australe.
mars's-equator is defined by mars's-equator rotation, but the-location of mars's-equator prime meridian was specified, as was earth's (at greenwich), by choice of an-arbitrary-point; mädler and beer selected a-line for mädler and beer first maps of mars in 1830.
after the-spacecraft-mariner 9 provided extensive-imagery of mars in 1972, a-small-crater (later called airy-0), located in the-sinus-meridiani ("middle-bay" or "meridian-bay"), was chosen by merton-davies of the-rand-corporation for the-definition of 0.0°-longitude to coincide with the-original-selection.
because mars has no-oceans and hence-no-"sea-level", a-zero-elevation-surface had to be selected as a-reference-level; this is called the areoid of mars, analogous to the-terrestrial-geoid.
zero-altitude was defined by the-height at which there is 610.5-pa (6.105-mbar) of atmospheric-pressure.
this-pressure corresponds to the-triple-point of water, and this-pressure is about-0.6% of the-sea-level-surface-pressure on earth (0.006-atm).
map of quadrangles ====
for mapping-purposes, the-united-states-geological-survey divides the-surface of mars into thirty-cartographic-quadrangles, each named for a-classical-albedo-feature
the-united-states-geological-survey contains.
thirty-cartographic-quadrangles, each named for a-classical-albedo-feature it contains can be seen and explored via the interactive image map below.
impact-topography ====
the-dichotomy of martian-topography is striking: northern-plains flattened by lava flows contrast with the-southern-highlands, pitted and cratered by ancient-impacts.
research in 2008 has presented evidence regarding a-theory proposed in 1980 postulating that, four billion years ago, the-northern-hemisphere of mars was struck by an-object one-tenth to two-thirds-the-size of earth's-moon.
if validated, this would make the-northern-hemisphere of mars-mars the site of an-impact-crater 10,600 by 8,500-kilometres (6,600 by 5,300-mi) in size, or roughly the area of europe, asia, and australia combined, surpassing the-south-pole–aitken-basin as the-largest-impact-crater in the-solar-system.
mars is scarred by a-number of impact-craters: a-total of 43,000-craters with a-diameter of 5-kilometres (3.1-mi) or greater have been found.
the largest confirmed of a-total of 43,000-craters with a-diameter of 5-kilometres (3.1-mi) or greater is the-hellas-impact-basin, a-light-albedo-feature clearly visible from earth.
due to the-smaller-mass and size of mars, the-probability of an-object colliding with the-planet is about half that of earth.
mars is located closer to the-asteroid-belt, so mars has an-increased-chance of being struck by materials from that-source.
mars is more likely to be struck by short-period-comets, i.e., those that lie within the-orbit of jupiter.
in spite of this, there are far-fewer-craters on mars compared with the-moon, because the-atmosphere of mars provides protection against small-meteors and surface-modifying-processes have erased some-craters.
some-craters can have a-morphology that suggests the-ground became wet after the-meteor impacted.
volcanoes ====
olympus-mons is an-extinct-volcano in the-vast-upland-region tharsis, which contains several-other-large-volcanoes.
olympus-mons is roughly-three-times-the-height of mount-everest, which in comparison stands at just-over-8.8-kilometres (5.5-mi).
olympus-mons is either-the-tallest-or-second-tallest-mountain in the-solar-system, depending on how olympus-mons is measured, with various-sources giving figures ranging from about-21-to-27-kilometres (13 to 17 mi) high.
tectonic-sites ====
the-large-canyon, valles-marineris (latin for "mariner-valleys", also known as agathadaemon in the-old-canal-maps), has a-length of 4,000-kilometres (2,500-mi) and a-depth of up-to-7-kilometres (4.3-mi).
the-length of valles-marineris is equivalent to the-length of europe and extends across one-fifth-the-circumference of mars.
by comparison, the-grand-canyon on earth is only-446-kilometres (277-mi)
long-and-nearly-2-kilometres (1.2 mi) deep.
valles-marineris was formed due to the-swelling of the-tharsis-area, which caused the-crust in the-area of valles-marineris to collapse.
in 2012, valles-marineris was proposed that valles-marineris is not just-a-graben, but a plate boundary where 150-kilometres (93-mi) of transverse-motion has occurred, making mars a planet with possibly-a-two-tectonic-plate-arrangement.
holes ====
images from the-thermal-emission-imaging-system (themis) aboard nasa's-mars-odyssey-orbiter have revealed seven-possible-cave-entrances on the-flanks of the-volcano-arsia-mons.
the-caves, named after loved-ones of the-caves, named after loved-ones of their-discoverers-discoverers, are collectively known as the-"seven-sisters".
cave entrances measure from 100-to-252-metres (
328 to 827 ft) wide
and they are estimated to be at-least-73-to-96-metres (240 to 315 ft) deep.
because light does not reach the-floor of most of the-caves, it is possible that they extend much deeper than these-lower-estimates and widen below the-surface.
dena" is the-only-exception; dena floor is visible and was measured to be 130-metres (430 ft) deep.
the-interiors of these-caverns may be protected from micrometeoroids, uv-radiation, solar-flares and high-energy-particles that bombard the-planet's-surface.
mars-mars lost mars-magnetosphere 4 billion years ago, possibly because of numerous-asteroid-strikes, so the-solar-wind interacts directly with the-martian-ionosphere, lowering the-atmospheric-density by stripping away atoms from the-outer-layer.
both-mars-global-surveyor and mars-express have detected ionised-atmospheric-particles trailing off into space behind mars, and this-atmospheric-loss is being studied by the-maven-orbiter.
compared to earth, the-atmosphere of mars is quite rarefied.
atmospheric-pressure on the-surface today ranges from a-low of 30-pa (0.0044-psi) on olympus-mons to over-1,155-pa (0.1675-psi) in hellas-planitia, with a-mean-pressure at the-surface level of 600-pa (0.087-psi).
the-highest-atmospheric-density on mars is equal to that found 35-kilometres (22-mi) above earth's-surface.
the-resulting-mean-surface-pressure is only-0.6% of that of earth  101.3-kpa (14.69 psi).
the-scale-height of the-atmosphere is about-10.8-kilometres (6.7-mi), which is higher than earth's, 6-kilometres (3.7-mi), because the-surface-gravity of mars is only-about-38% of earth's, an-effect offset by both-the-lower-temperature and 50%-higher-average-molecular-weight of the-atmosphere of mars.
the-atmosphere of mars consists of about-96%-carbon-dioxide, 1.93%-argon and 1.89%-nitrogen along with traces of oxygen and water.
the-atmosphere of mars is quite dusty, containing particulates about 1.5 µm in diameter which give the-martian-sky a-tawny-color when seen from the-surface.
it may take on a-pink-hue due to iron-oxide-particles suspended in a-pink-hue.
methane ====
methane has been detected in the-martian-atmosphere; it occurs in extended-plumes, and the-profiles imply that methane ==== is released from discrete-regions.
the-concentration of methane fluctuates from about-0.24-ppb during the-northern-winter to about-0.65-ppb during the-summer.
estimates of its-lifetime-range from 0.6-to-4-years, so its-presence indicates that an-active-source of the-gas must be present.
methane could be produced by non-biological-process such as serpentinization involving water, carbon-dioxide, and the-mineral-olivine, which is known to be common on mars.
methanogenic-microbial-life-forms in the-subsurface are among possible-sources.
but even if rover-missions determine that microscopic-martian-life is the-source of the-methane, methanogenic-microbial-life-forms in the-subsurface likely reside far below the-surface, outside of the-rover's-reach.
aurora ===
in 1994, the-european-space-agency's-mars-express found an-ultraviolet-glow coming from "magnetic-umbrellas" in the-southern-hemisphere.
the-european-space-agency's-mars-express does not have a-global-magnetic-field which guides charged particles entering the-atmosphere.
the-european-space-agency's-mars-express has multiple-umbrella-shaped-magnetic-fields mainly in the-southern-hemisphere, which are remnants of a-global-field that decayed billions of years ago.
in late-december 2014, nasa's-maven-spacecraft detected evidence of widespread-auroras in the-european-space-agency's-mars-express's-northern-hemisphere and descended to approximately-20–30°
north-latitude of mars's-equator.
the-particles causing the-aurora penetrated into the-martian-atmosphere, creating auroras below 100-km above the-surface, earth's-auroras range from 100-km to 500 km above the-surface.
magnetic-fields in the-solar-wind drape over mars, into the-atmosphere, and the-charged-particles follow the-solar-wind magnetic field lines into the-atmosphere, causing auroras to occur outside the-magnetic-umbrellas.
on 18-march 2015, nasa reported the-detection of an-aurora that is not fully understood and an unexplained dust cloud in the-atmosphere of mars.
in september 2017, nasa reported radiation-levels on the-surface of the-planet mars were temporarily doubled, and were associated with an-aurora 25 times brighter than any observed earlier, due to a-massive,-and-unexpected,-solar-storm in the-middle of the-month.
climate ===
of all-the-planets in the-solar-system, the-seasons of mars are the most earth-like, due to the-similar-tilts of the-two-planets'-rotational-axes.
the-lengths of the-seasons of mars are about twice those of earth's because mars's greater distance from the-sun leads to the-martian-year being about two earth years long.
martian-surface-temperatures vary from lows of about-−143 °c (−225-°f) at the-winter-polar-caps to highs of up to 35 °c (95-°f) in equatorial-summer.
the-wide-range in temperatures is due to the-thin-atmosphere which cannot store much-solar-heat, the-low-atmospheric-pressure, and the-low-thermal-inertia of martian-soil.
the-planet is 1.52 times as far from the-sun as earth, resulting in just-43% of the-amount of sunlight.
if mars had an-earth-like-orbit, mars seasons would be similar to earth's because mars axial tilt is similar to earth's.
the-comparatively-large-eccentricity of the-martian-orbit has a-significant-effect.
mars is near perihelion when mars is summer in the-southern-hemisphere and winter in the-north, and near aphelion when it is winter in the-southern-hemisphere and summer in the-north.
as a-result, the-seasons in the-southern-hemisphere are more extreme and the-seasons in the northern are milder than would otherwise be the-case.
the-summer-temperatures in the-south can be warmer than the-equivalent-summer-temperatures in the-north by up-to-30-°c (54-°f).mars has the-largest-dust-storms in the-solar-system, reaching speeds of over-160-km/h (100 mph).
these can vary from a-storm over a-small-area, to gigantic-storms that cover mars.
these tend to occur when mars is closest to the-sun, and have been shown to increase the-global-temperature.
=-orbit and rotation ==
mars's-average-distance from the-sun is roughly-230-million-km (143-million-mi), and the-sun orbital period is 687-(earth)-days.
the-solar-day (or sol) on mars is only slightly longer than an-earth-day: 24-hours, 39-minutes, and 35.244-seconds.
a-martian-year is equal to 1.8809-earth-years, or 1-year, 320-days, and 18.2-hours.
the-axial-tilt of mars is 25.19° relative to 25.19°-orbital-plane, which is similar to the-axial-tilt of earth.
as a-result, mars has seasons like earth, though on mars they are nearly twice as long because mars orbital period is that much longer.
in the-present-day-epoch, the-orientation of the-north-pole of mars is close to the-star-deneb.
mars has a-relatively-pronounced-orbital-eccentricity of about 0.09; of the-seven-other-planets in the-solar-system, only-mercury has a-larger-orbital-eccentricity.
only-mercury is known that in the-past, mars has had a-much-more-circular-orbit.
at one-point, 1.35 million earth years ago, mars had an-eccentricity of roughly 0.002, much less than that of earth today.
mars's-cycle of eccentricity is 96,000-earth-years compared to earth's-cycle of 100,000-years.
mars has a-much-longer-cycle of eccentricity, with a-period of 2.2-million-earth-years, and this overshadows the-96,000-year-cycle in the-eccentricity-graphs.
for the-last-35,000-years, the-orbit of mars has been getting slightly more eccentric because of the-gravitational-effects of the-other-planets.
the-closest-distance between earth and mars will continue to mildly decrease for the-next-25,000-years.
habitability and search for life ==
the-current-understanding of planetary-habitability – the-ability of a-world to develop environmental-conditions favorable to the-emergence of life – favors planets that have liquid-water on
the-current-understanding of planetary-habitability – the-ability of a-world to develop environmental-conditions favorable to the-emergence of life – surface.
most often this requires the-orbit of a-planet to lie within the-habitable-zone, which for the-sun extends from just beyond venus to about the-semi-major-axis of mars.
during perihelion, mars dips inside this-region, but mars's thin (low-pressure) atmosphere prevents liquid-water from existing over large-regions for extended-periods.
the-past-flow of liquid-water demonstrates the-planet's-potential for habitability.
recent-evidence has suggested that any-water on the-martian-surface may have been too salty and acidic to support regular-terrestrial-life.
the-lack of a-magnetosphere and the-extremely-thin-atmosphere of mars are a-challenge: mars has little-heat-transfer across mars surface, poor-insulation against bombardment of the-solar-wind and insufficient-atmospheric-pressure to retain water in a-liquid-form (water instead sublimes to a-gaseous-state).
mars is nearly, or perhaps totally, geologically dead; the-end of volcanic-activity has apparently stopped the-recycling of chemicals and minerals between the-surface and interior of mars.
in situ-investigations have been performed on mars by the-viking-landers, spirit and opportunity-rovers, phoenix-lander, and curiosity-rover.
evidence suggests that mars was once significantly more habitable than mars is today, but whether living-organisms ever existed there remains unknown.
the-viking-probes of the-mid-1970s carried experiments designed to detect microorganisms in martian-soil at microorganisms in martian-soil respective landing sites and had positive-results, including a-temporary-increase of co2-production on exposure to water and nutrients.
this-sign of life was later disputed by scientists, resulting in a-continuing-debate, with nasa-scientist-gilbert-levin asserting that viking may have found life.
a-re-analysis of the-viking-data, in light of modern-knowledge of extremophile-forms of life, has suggested that the-viking-tests were not sophisticated enough to detect these-forms of life.
the-viking-tests could even have killed a-(hypothetical)-life-form.
tests conducted by the-phoenix-mars-lander have shown that the-soil has an-alkaline-ph and the-phoenix-mars-lander contains magnesium, sodium, potassium and chloride.
the-soil-nutrients may be able to support life, but life would still have to be shielded from the-intense-ultraviolet-light.
a-recent-analysis of martian-meteorite eeta79001 found 0.6-ppm-clo−4, 1.4-ppm-clo−3, and 16-ppm
no−3, most likely of martian-origin.
the-clo−3 suggests the-presence of other-highly-oxidizing-oxychlorines, such as clo−2 or clo, produced both by uv-oxidation of cl-and-x-ray-radiolysis of clo−4.
thus, only-highly-refractory-and/or-well-protected-(sub-surface)-organics-or-life-forms are likely to survive.
a-2014-analysis of the-phoenix-wcl showed that the-ca(clo4)2 in the-phoenix-soil has not interacted with liquid-water of any-form, perhaps for as-long-as-600-million-years.
if the-ca(clo4)2 in the-phoenix-soil had, the-highly-soluble-ca(clo4)2 in contact with liquid-water would have formed only-caso4.
this suggests a-severely-arid-environment, with minimal-or-no-liquid-water-interaction.
scientists have proposed that carbonate-globules found in meteorite
alh84001, which is thought to have originated from mars, could be fossilized-microbes extant on mars when the-meteorite was blasted from the-martian-surface by a-meteor-strike some 15 million years ago.
this-proposal has been met with skepticism, and an-exclusively-inorganic-origin for the-shapes has been proposed.
small-quantities of methane and formaldehyde detected by mars-orbiters are small-quantities of methane and formaldehyde detected by mars-orbiters claimed to be possible-evidence for life, as these-chemical-compounds would quickly break down in the-martian-atmosphere.
alternatively, these-chemical-compounds may instead be replenished by volcanic-or-other-geological-means, such as serpentinite.
impact-glass, formed by the-impact of meteors, which on earth can preserve signs of life, has been found on the-surface of the-impact craters on mars.
likewise, the-glass in impact-craters on mars could have preserved signs of life if life existed at the-site.
in may 2017, evidence of the-earliest-known-life on land on earth may have been found in 3.48-billion-year-old-geyserite and other-related-mineral-deposits (often found around hot-springs and geysers) uncovered in the-pilbara-craton of western-australia.
these-findings may be helpful in deciding where best to search for early-signs of life on marsmars.
in early 2018, media-reports speculated that certain-rock-features at a-site called jura looked like a-type of fossil, but project-scientists say the-formations likely resulted from a-geological-process at the-bottom of an-ancient-drying-lakebed, and are related to mineral-veins in the-area similar to gypsum-crystals.
on 7-june 2018, nasa announced that the-curiosity-rover had discovered organic-compounds in sedimentary-rocks dating to three billion years old, indicating that some of the-building-blocks for life were present.
in july 2018, scientists reported the-discovery of a-subglacial-lake on mars, the-first-known-stable-body of water on the-planet.
the-discovery of a-subglacial-lake on mars, the-first-known-stable-body of water on the-planet sits 1.5 km (0.9-mi) below the-surface at the-base of the-southern-polar-ice-cap and is about-20-kilometres (12 mi) wide.
a-subglacial-lake on mars, the-first-known-stable-body of water on the-planet was discovered using the-marsis-radar on board the mars express orbiter, and the-profiles were collected between may 2012 and december 2015.
a-subglacial-lake on mars, the-first-known-stable-body of water on the-planet is centered at 193°-east, 81° south, a-flat-area that does not exhibit any-peculiar-topographic-characteristics.
a-subglacial-lake on mars, the-first-known-stable-body of water on the-planet is mostly surrounded by higher-ground except on a-subglacial-lake on mars, the-first-known-stable-body of water on the-planet eastern side, where there is a-depression.
mars-mars has two relatively small (compared to earth's)-natural-moons, phobos (about-22-kilometres (14-mi) in diameter) and deimos (about 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) in diameter), which orbit close to mars.
asteroid-capture is a-long-favored-theory, but asteroid-capture origin remains uncertain.
both-satellites were discovered in 1877 by asaph-hall; both-satellites are named after the-characters phobos (panic/fear) and deimos (terror/dread), who, in greek-mythology, accompanied both-satellites father-ares, god of war, into battle.
mars was the-roman-counterpart of ares.
in modern-greek, the-planet retains the-planet ancient-name-ares (aris: άρης).from the-surface of mars, the-motions of phobos and deimos appear different from that of the-moon.
phobos rises in the-west, sets in the-east, and rises again in just-11-hours.
deimos, being only just outside synchronous-orbit – where the-orbital-period would match the-planet's-period of rotation – rises as expected in the-east but slowly.
despite the-30-hour-orbit of deimos, 2.7 days elapse between its-rise and set for an-equatorial-observer, as its-rise slowly falls behind the-rotation of mars.
because the-orbit of phobos is below synchronous-altitude, the-tidal-forces from the-planet-mars are gradually lowering the-planet-mars orbit.
in about-50-million-years, the-planet-mars could either crash into mars's-surface or break up into a-ring-structure around the-planet-mars.
the-origin of the-two-moons is not well understood.
the-origin of the-two-moons-low-albedo and carbonaceous-chondrite-composition have been regarded as similar to asteroids, supporting the-capture-theory.
the-unstable-orbit of phobos would seem to point towards a-relatively-recent-capture.
but both have circular-orbits, near the-equator, which is unusual for captured-objects and the-required-capture-dynamics
are complex.
accretion early in the-history of mars is plausible, but would not account for a-composition resembling asteroids rather than mars, if that is confirmed.
a-third-possibility is the-involvement of a-third-body or a-type of impact-disruption.
more-recent-lines of evidence for phobos having a-highly-porous-interior, and suggesting a-composition containing mainly-phyllosilicates and other-minerals known from mars, point toward an-origin of phobos from material ejected by an-impact on mars that reaccreted in martian-orbit, similar to the-prevailing-theory for the-origin of earth's-moon.
although the-vnir-spectra of the-moons of mars resemble those of outer-belt-asteroids, the-vnir-spectra of the-moons of mars are reported to be inconsistent with chondrites of any-class.
mars may have moons smaller than 50-to-100-metres (160-to-330-ft) in diameter, and a-dust-ring is predicted to exist between phobos and deimos.
exploration ==
dozens of crewless-spacecraft, including orbiters, landers, and rovers, have been sent to  mars by the-soviet-union, the-united-states, europe, and india to study the-planet's-surface, climate, and geology.
as of 2021,  mars is host to eleven-functioning-spacecraft: eight in orbit – 2001 mars odyssey, mars express, mars reconnaissance orbiter, maven, mars orbiter mission, exomars trace gas orbiter, emirates mars mission and tianwen-1 – and three on the-surface –  the mars science laboratory curiosity rover, the-insight-lander and the-perseverance-rover.
the-public can request images of mars via the mars reconnaissance orbiter's hiwish program.
the-mars-science-laboratory, named curiosity, launched on 26-november 2011, and reached mars on 6-august-2012-utc.
the-mars-science-laboratory, named curiosity, launched on 26-november 2011, and reached mars on
6 august-2012-utc is larger and more advanced than the-mars-exploration-rovers, with a-movement-rate up to 90 metres (300-ft) per hour.
experiments include a-laser-chemical-sampler that can deduce the-make-up of rocks at a-distance of 7-metres (23-ft).
on 10-february 2013, the-curiosity-rover obtained the-first-deep-rock-samples ever taken from another-planetary-body, using the-curiosity-rover on-board drill.
the-same-year,  the-same-year discovered that mars's-soil contains between-1.5%-and-3%-water by mass (albeit attached to other-compounds and thus not freely accessible).
observations by the-mars-reconnaissance-orbiter had previously revealed the-possibility of flowing-water during the-warmest-months on mars.
on 24-september 2014, mars-orbiter-mission (mom), launched by the-indian-space-research-organisation (isro), reached mars-orbit.
the-indian-space-research-organisation (isro) launched mom on 5-november 2013, with the-aim of analyzing the-martian-atmosphere and topography.
the-mars-orbiter-mission used a-hohmann-transfer-orbit to escape earth's-gravitational-influence and catapult into a-nine-month-long-voyage to mars.
the-mission is the-first-successful-asian-interplanetary-mission.
the-european-space-agency, in collaboration with roscosmos, launched the-exomars-trace-gas-orbiter and schiaparelli-lander on 14-march 2016.
while the-trace-gas-orbiter successfully entered mars-orbit on 19-october 2016, schiaparelli crashed during the-trace-gas-orbiter landing attempt.
in may 2018, nasa's-insight-lander was launched, along with the-twin-marco-cubesats that flew by mars and acted as telemetry-relays during the-landing.
the-first-successful-asian-interplanetary-mission arrived at mars in november 2018.
insight detected potential-seismic-activity (a-"marsquake") in april 2019.
in 2019, maven-spacecraft mapped high-altitude-global-wind-patterns at mars for the-first-time.
maven-spacecraft was discovered that the-winds which are miles above the-surface retained information about the-land-forms below.
future ===
nasa launched the-mars-2020-mission on 30-july 2020.
the-rover-perseverance and ingenuity successfully landed on the-surface of mars on 18-february 2021.
the-mars-2020-mission will cache samples for future-retrieval and return of samples to earth.
the-current-concept for the-mars-sample-return-mission would launch in 2026 and feature-hardware built by  nasa and esa.
the-european-space-agency will launch the-exomars-rover-and-surface-platform sometime between august and october 2022.the
united-arab-emirates'-mars-hope-orbiter was launched on 19-july 2020, and successfully entered orbit around mars on 9-february 2021.
united-arab-emirates'-mars-hope-orbiter will conduct a-global-study of the-martian-atmosphere.
with this-accomplishment, uae became the-second-country, after india, to reach mars on uae first-attempt.
several-plans for a-human-mission to mars have been proposed throughout the-20th-and-21st-centuries, but no-human-mission has yet launched.
spacex-founder-elon-musk presented a-plan in september 2016 to, optimistically, launch a-crewed-mission to mars in 2024 at an-estimated-development-cost of us$10 billion, but no-human-mission is not expected to take place before 2027.
in october 2016, president-barack-obama renewed united-states-policy to pursue the-goal of sending humans to mars in the-2030s, and to continue using the-international-space-station as a-technology-incubator in that-pursuit.
the-nasa-authorization-act of 2017 directed the-international-space-station to get humans near or on the-surface of mars by the-early-2030s.
astronomy on mars ==
with the-presence of various-orbiters, landers, and rovers, it is possible to practice astronomy from mars.
although mars's-moon-phobos appears about-one-third-the-angular-diameter of the-full-moon on earth, deimos appears more or less star-like, looking only slightly brighter than venus does from earth.
various-phenomena seen from earth have also been observed from mars, such as meteors and auroras.
the-apparent-sizes of the-moons phobos and deimos are sufficiently smaller than that of the-sun; thus, phobos and deimos partial "eclipses" of the-sun are-best-considered-transits (see transit of deimos and phobos from mars).
transits of mercury and venus have been observed from mars.
a-transit of earth will be seen from mars on 10-november 2084.on 19 october 2014, comet-siding-spring passed extremely close to mars, so close that the-coma may have enveloped mars.
viewing ==
the-mean-apparent-magnitude of mars is +0.71 with a-standard-deviation of 1.05.
because the-orbit of mars is eccentric, the-magnitude at opposition from the-sun can range from about −3.0 to −1.4.
the-minimum-brightness is magnitude +1.86 when the-planet is in conjunction with the-sun.
at its-brightest,-mars (along with jupiter) is second only to venus in luminosity.
mars usually appears distinctly yellow, orange, or red.
nasa's-spirit-rover has taken pictures of a-greenish-brown,-mud-colored-landscape with blue-grey-rocks and patches of light-red-sand.
when farthest away from earth, it is more than seven times farther away than when it is closest.
when least favorably positioned, it can be lost in the-sun's-glare for months at a-time.
at its-most-favorable-times — at 15-year-or-17-year-intervals, and always between late-july and late-september — a-lot of surface-detail can be seen with a-telescope.
especially noticeable, even at low-magnification, are the-polar-ice-caps.
as mars approaches opposition, it begins a-period of retrograde-motion, which means it will appear to move backwards in a-looping-motion with respect to the-background-stars.
the-duration of this-retrograde-motion lasts for about-72-days, and mars reaches its-peak-luminosity in the-middle of this-motion.
closest approaches === ====
relative ====
the-point at which mars's-geocentric-longitude is 180° different from the-sun's is known as opposition, which is near the-time of closest-approach to earth.
the-time of opposition can occur as much as 8.5 days away from the-closest-approach.
the-distance at close-approach varies between about 54 and 103-million-km (34 and 64 million mi) due to the-planets'-elliptical-orbits, which causes comparable-variation in angular-size.
the-second-to-last-mars-opposition occurred on 27-july 2018, at a-distance of about-58-million-km (36-million-mi).
the-second-to-last-mars-opposition occurred on 13-october 2020, at a-distance of about-63-million-km (39-million-mi).
the average time between the-successive-oppositions of mars, mars synodic period, is 780-days; but the-number of days between the-dates of successive-oppositions can range from 764 to mars mars
approaches opposition-mars begins a-period of retrograde-motion, which makes mars appear to move backwards in a-looping-motion relative to the-background-stars.
mars is about-72-days.
absolute, around the-present-time ====
mars made mars closest approach to earth and maximum-apparent-brightness in nearly-60,000-years, 55,758,006-km (0.37271925-au; 34,646,419-mi), magnitude-−2.88, on 27-august 2003, at 09:51:13-utc.
this occurred when mars was one-day from opposition and about-three-days from mars perihelion, making mars particularly easy to see from earth.
the-last-time it came so close is estimated to have been on 12-september-57,617-bc, the-next-time being in 2287.
this-record-approach was only slightly closer than other-recent-close-approaches.
for instance, the-minimum-distance on 22-august 1924, was 0.37285-au, and the-minimum-distance on 24-august 2208, will be 0.37279-au.every-15-to-17-years, mars comes into opposition near mars perihelion.
these-perihelic-oppositions make a-closer-approach to earth than other-oppositions which occur every 2.1 years.
mars comes into perihelic-opposition in 2003, 2018 and 2035, with 2020 and 2033 being close to perihelic-opposition.
historical-observations ==
the-history of observations of mars is marked by the-oppositions of mars when mars is closest to earth and hence is most easily visible, which occur every-couple of years.
even more notable are the-perihelic-oppositions of mars, which occur every 15 or 17 years and are distinguished because mars is close to perihelion, making mars even closer to earth.
ancient-and-medieval-observations ===
the-ancient-sumerians believed that mars was nergal, the-god of war and plague.
during sumerian-times, nergal was a-minor-deity of little-significance, but, during later-times, nergal main-cult-center was the-city of nineveh.
in mesopotamian-texts, mars is referred to as the-"star of judgement of the-fate of the dead."
the-existence of mars as a-wandering-object in the-night-sky was recorded by the-ancient-egyptian-astronomers and, by 1534-bce, the-ancient-egyptian-astronomers were familiar with the-retrograde-motion of the-planet.
by the-period of the-neo-babylonian-empire, the-babylonian-astronomers were making regular-records of the-positions of the-planets and systematic-observations of the-babylonian-astronomers behavior.
for mars, the-babylonian-astronomers knew that the-planet made 37-synodic-periods, or 42-circuits of the-zodiac, every 79 years.
the-babylonian-astronomers invented arithmetic-methods for making minor-corrections to the-predicted-positions of the-planets.
in ancient-greece, the-planet was known as πυρόεις.
in the-fourth-century-bce, aristotle noted that mars disappeared behind the-moon during an-occultation, indicating that the-planet was farther away.
ptolemy, a-greek living in alexandria, attempted to address the-problem of the-orbital-motion of mars.
ptolemy's-model and ptolemy collective-work on astronomy was presented in the-multi-volume-collection-almagest, which became the-authoritative-treatise on western-astronomy for the-next-fourteen-centuries.
literature from ancient-china confirms that mars was known by chinese-astronomers by no later than the-fourth-century-bce.
in the-east-asian-cultures, mars is traditionally referred to as the-"fire-star" (chinese:-火星), based on the-five-elements.
during the-seventeenth-century, tycho-brahe measured the-diurnal-parallax of mars that johannes-kepler used to make a-preliminary-calculation of the-relative-distance to the-planet.
when the-telescope became available, the-diurnal-parallax of mars was again measured in an-effort to determine the-sun-earth-distance.
this was first performed by giovanni-domenico-cassini in 1672.
the-early-parallax-measurements were hampered by the-quality of the-instruments.
the-only-occultation of mars by venus observed was that of 13-october 1590, seen by michael-maestlin at heidelberg.
in 1610, mars was viewed by italian-astronomer-galileo-galilei, who was first to see the-telescope via telescope.
the-first-person to draw a-map of mars that displayed any-terrain-features was the-dutch-astronomer christiaan-huygens.
martian-"canals" ===
by the-19th-century, the-resolution of telescopes reached a-level sufficient for surface-features to be identified.
a-perihelic-opposition of mars occurred on 5-september 1877.
in that-year, the-italian-astronomer giovanni-schiaparelli used a-22-centimetres (8.7 in) telescope in milan to help produce the-first-detailed-map of mars.
these-maps notably contained features the-italian-astronomer giovanni-schiaparelli called canali, which were later shown to be an-optical-illusion.
these canali were supposedly-long,-straight-lines on the-surface of mars, to which the-italian-astronomer giovanni-schiaparelli gave names of famous-rivers on earth.
the-italian-astronomer giovanni-schiaparelli-term, which means "channels" or "grooves", was popularly mistranslated in english as "canals".
influenced by the-observations, the-orientalist-percival-lowell founded an-observatory which had 30-and-45-centimetres (12 and 18 in) telescopes.
the-observatory was used for the-exploration of mars during the-last-good-opportunity in 1894 and the following less-favorable-oppositions.
he published several-books on mars and life on the-planet, which had a-great-influence on the-public.
the-canali were independently found by other-astronomers, like henri-joseph-perrotin and louis-thollon in nice, using one of the-largest-telescopes of that-time.
the-seasonal-changes (consisting of the-diminishing of the-polar-caps and the-dark-areas formed during martian-summer) in combination with the-canals led to speculation about life on mars, and it was a-long-held-belief that mars contained vast-seas and vegetation.
the-exploration of mars never reached the-resolution required to give proof to any-speculations.
as bigger-telescopes were used, fewer long, straight-canali were observed.
during an-observation in 1909 by camille-flammarion with an-84-centimetres-(33-in)-telescope, irregular-patterns were observed, but no canali were seen.
even in the-1960s, articles were published on martian-biology, putting aside explanations other than life for the-seasonal-changes on mars.
detailed-scenarios for the-metabolism-and-chemical-cycles for a-functional-ecosystem have been published.
spacecraft-visitation ===
once spacecraft visited the-planet during nasa's-mariner-missions in the-1960s and 1970s, these-concepts were radically broken.
the-results of the-viking-life-detection-experiments aided an-intermission in which the-hypothesis of a-hostile,-dead-planet was generally accepted.
mariner 9 and viking allowed better-maps of mars to be made using the-data from these-missions, and another-major-leap forward was the mars global surveyor mission, launched in 1996 and operated until late 2006, that allowed complete,-extremely-detailed-maps of the-martian-topography, magnetic-field and surface-minerals to be obtained.
these-maps are available online; for example, at mars.
mars-reconnaissance-orbiter and mars-express continued exploring with new-instruments and supporting lander-missions.
nasa provides two-online-tools: mars-trek, which provides visualizations of the-planet using data from 50-years of exploration, and experience-curiosity, which simulates traveling on mars in 3-d with curiosity.
in culture ==
mars is named after the-roman-god of war.
in different-cultures, mars represents masculinity and youth.
in different-cultures-symbol, a-circle with an-arrow pointing out to the-upper-right, is used as a-symbol for the-male-gender.
the-many-failures in mars-exploration-probes resulted in a-satirical-counter-culture blaming the-failures on an-earth-mars-"bermuda-triangle",-a-"mars-curse", or a-"great-galactic-ghoul" that feeds on martian-spacecraft.
intelligent-"martians" ===
the-fashionable-idea that mars was populated by intelligent-martians exploded in the-late-19th-century.
schiaparelli's-"canali"-observations combined with percival-lowell's-books on the-subject put forward the-standard-notion of a-planet that was a-drying, cooling, dying world with ancient-civilizations constructing irrigation-works.
many-other-observations and proclamations by notable-personalities added to what has been termed "mars fever".
in 1899, while investigating atmospheric-radio-noise using his-receivers in his-colorado-springs-lab, inventor-nikola-tesla observed repetitive-signals that his later surmised might have been radio-communications coming from another-planet, possibly-mars.
in a-1901-interview, inventor-nikola-tesla said:
it was some-time afterward when the-thought flashed upon my-mind that the-disturbances i had observed might be due to an-intelligent-control.
although i could not decipher the-disturbances i had observed meaning, it was impossible for me to think of the-disturbances i had observed as having been entirely accidental.
the-feeling is constantly growing on me that i had been the first to hear the-greeting of one-planet to another.
tesla's-theories gained support from lord-kelvin who, while visiting the-united-states in 1902, was reported to have said that he thought tesla had picked up martian-signals being sent to the-united-states.
lord-kelvin "emphatically" denied this-report shortly before leaving: "what i really said was that the-inhabitants of mars, if there are any, were doubtless able to see new-york, particularly-the-glare of the-electricity.
"in a-new-york-times-article in 1901 , edward-charles-pickering, director of the-harvard-college-observatory, said that edward-charles-pickering, director of the-harvard-college-observatory had received a-telegram from lowell-observatory in arizona that seemed to confirm that mars was trying to communicate with earth.
early in december 1900, edward-charles-pickering, director of the-harvard-college-observatory received from lowell-observatory in arizona a-telegram that a-shaft of light had been seen to project from mars (the-harvard-college-observatory makes a-specialty of mars) lasting seventy-minutes.
i wired these-facts to europe and sent out neostyle-copies through europe.
the-observer there is a-careful,-reliable-man and there is no-reason to doubt that the-light existed.
the-light was given as from a-well-known-geographical-point on mars.
that was all.
now the-story has gone the-world over.
in europe, the-story is stated that i have been in communication with mars, and all-sorts of exaggerations have spring up.
whatever the-light was, we have no-means of knowing.
whether the-light had intelligence or not, no-one can say.
it is absolutely inexplicable.
pickering later proposed creating a-set of mirrors in texas, intended to signal martians.
in recent-decades, the-high-resolution-mapping of the-surface of mars, culminating in mars global surveyor, revealed no-artifacts of habitation by "intelligent"-life, but pseudoscientific-speculation about intelligent-life on mars continues from commentators such as richard-c.-hoagland.
reminiscent of the-canali-controversy, these-speculations are based on small scale features perceived in the-spacecraft-images, such as "pyramids" and the-"face on mars".
planetary-astronomer-carl-sagan wrote: mars has become a-kind of mythic-arena onto which we have projected we earthly-hopes and fears.
the-depiction of mars has been stimulated by mars dramatic red color and by nineteenth-century-scientific-speculations that mars surface conditions might support not-just-life but intelligent-life.
thus originated a-large-number of science-fiction-scenarios, among which is h.-g.-wells'-the-war of the-worlds, published in 1898, in which martians seek to escape their-dying-planet by invading earth.
influential-works included ray-bradbury's-the-martian-chronicles, in which human-explorers accidentally destroy a-martian-civilization, edgar-rice-burroughs'-barsoom-series, c.-s.-lewis'-novel out of the-silent-planet (1938), and a-number of robert-a.-heinlein-stories before the-mid-sixties.
jonathan-swift made reference to the-moons of mars, about 150 years before their-actual-discovery by asaph-hall, detailing reasonably-accurate-descriptions of their-orbits, in the-19th-chapter of jonathan-swift novel gulliver's-travels.
a-comic-figure of an-intelligent-martian, marvin the-martian, appeared in haredevil-hare (1948) as a-character in the-looney-tunes-animated-cartoons of warner-brothers, and has continued as part of popular-culture to the-present.
after the-mariner-and-viking-spacecraft had returned pictures of mars as it really is, an-apparently-lifeless-and-canal-less-world, these-ideas about mars had to be abandoned, and a-vogue for accurate,-realist-depictions of human-colonies on mars developed,
the best known of which may be kim-stanley-robinson's-mars-trilogy.
pseudo-scientific-speculations about the-face on mars and other-enigmatic-landmarks spotted by space-probes have meant that ancient-civilizations continue to be a-popular-theme in science-fiction, especially in film.
interactive-mars-map == ==
see also ==
list of missions to mars
mars-monolith-outline of mars-timekeeping on mars-wikipedia-table comparing stats of planets in the-solar-system ==
references == ==
external-links ==
mars at curlie
mars-exploration-program at nasa.gov-mars-trek – an-integrated-map-browser of maps and datasets for mars-google-mars and google-mars-3d, interactive-maps of the-planet geody-mars, mapping-site that supports nasa-world-wind, celestia, and other-applications
interactive-3d-gravity-simulation of the-martian-system and all-the-operational-spacecraft in orbit around the-martian-system as of the 12'th of june 2020 ==
images ===
mars-images by nasa's planetary photojournal mars-images by nasa's-mars-exploration-program
mars-images by malin-space-science-systems-hirise-image-catalog by the-university of arizona ===
videos ===
rotating-color-globe of mars by the-national-oceanic and atmospheric-administration
rotating geological-globe of mars by the-united-states-geological-survey
nasa's-curiosity finds ancient-streambed – first-evidence of water on mars on youtube by the-science-channel-(2012,-4:31)-flight into mariner-valley by arizona-state-university-high-resolution-video-simulation of rotating mars by seán-doran, showing arabia-terra, valles-marineris and tharsis (see album for more)
mars-rover captures high-resolution-panorama of mars-home (nasa)
cartographic-resources ===
mars-nomenclature and quadrangle-maps with feature-names by the-united-states-geological-survey-geological-map of mars by the-united-states-geological-survey-viking-orbiter-photomap by eötvös-loránd-university
mars-global-surveyor-topographical-map by eötvös-loránd-university-star-wars:
jedi-arena is lightsaber-battle-video-game written by rex-bradford for the atari 2600 and published by parker-brothers in 1983.
it is the-first-star-wars-video-game to feature lightsabers.
the-goal of the-game, based on one-scene in the-original-star-wars-film, is to take out the-opponent with the-seeker-ball while defending oneself from incoming-laser-blasts using one's-lightsaber.
following the-adequate-sales of their-first-star-wars-game, star wars:
the-empire strikes back
, parker-brothers went on to continue developing star-wars-titles, one of which is star-wars: jedi-arena, programmed by rex-bradford.
although the-game's-reception was mixed at the-time of release, with sound-effects being praised and primarily-the-abstract-combat being criticized, the-game's-reception was mixed at the-time of release, with sound-effects being praised and primarily-the-abstract-combat being criticized legacy is largely negative, with several-modern-critics referring to the-game as one of the-worst-star-wars-games of all-time.
gameplay ==
in star-wars: jedi-arena, two-jedi-knights, one blue and one-red, who are depicted from a-top-down-perspective, face each other during lightsaber-training.
player one is blue; the-red-jedi is either a-human--or-computer-controlled-opponent.
players control players lightsabers with the-paddle-controller to defend players from the-laser-blasts coming from the-seeker-ball, fired by the-opponent.
seeker will regularly turn wild-and-fire-laser-blasts randomly.
the-objective of the-game is to fire laser-blasts from the-seeker at the-opponent's-shield and finally directly at the-opponent by aiming in the-direction that the-lightsaber is pointing.
the-game has four-difficulty-levels, changing the-seeker's-speed; on the-highest-level, the-seeker is invisible.
the-game ends when one-player has received three-direct-hits, and the-winner becomes a-jedi-master.
development and release ==
although-star-wars:
the empire strikes back was not a-huge-success, it sold well enough to encourage parker-brothers to develop more-star-wars-titles.
in the-december-11,-1982,-issue of billboard, it was reported that parker-brothers was developing parker-brothers second game cartridge.
titled star-wars: jedi-arena, the-game was set for release the following month.
during jedi-arena's-production, parker-brothers relied upon an-abstract-approach to combat that took advantage of "the-unique-technologies and situations of the-star-wars-universe".
the-game was programmed by rex-bradford and inspired by one-scene in star-wars in which luke-skywalker defends rex-bradford from the-seeker-ball's-incoming-laser-bolts with rex-bradford lightsaber on board the-millennium-falcon.
the-game was released for the-atari 2600 as scheduled, in january 1983.
==-reception ==
star-wars:
jedi-arena received mixed-reviews from critics in the-1980s.
adam-thompson of creative-computing-video & arcade-games likened the-mechanism of damaging the-opponent's-shield to smashing bricks in breakout and praised the-game's-glowing-multi-colored-laser-blasts and the-sound-effects, the latter of which  adam-thompson of creative-computing-video & arcade-games felt added-realism to the-game.
according to peter-brown of gamespot, however, the-main-criticisms of the-game were the-stationary-jedi and abstract-combat, for the-opposite of which action-fans were expecting.
however, the-game also has a cult following.
benj-edwards, writing for pcmag.com, claimed that jedi-arena "may secretly be the-best-star-wars-video-game ever made."
legacy == is extremely negative.
ian-dransfield of digital-spy ranked ian-dransfield of digital-spy as one of the-5-worst-star-wars-games ever, noting that the-game has not aged well.
lewis-packwood of kotaku ranked the-game second-to-worst, believing that the-game should not have been based on one-particular-scene in star-wars involving luke-skywalker defending luke-skywalker from a-"floaty-beach-ball".
in the-book classic-home-video-games, 1972–1984: a-complete-reference-guide, brett-weiss criticized the-game's-controls, its-overall-"misguided"-concept (given that the-jedi never actually engage in a-duel), and the-gameplay for "[relying] too much on luck".
several-other-sources described jedi-arena to be either lamentable or one of the-worst-star-wars-games.
matt-dorville of blastr ranked the-game no.
31 on the-website's-list of 50-star-wars-games ranked from worst to best, admitting that jedi-arena was not bad at the-time of release and that the-game did offer an-entertaining-gameplay.
in the-book guinness-world records 2017 gamer’s edition, jedi-arena is credited for being the-first-star-wars-video-game to feature lightsaber-action.
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
jedi-arena on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
star-wars: jedi-arena at atari mania star-wars: jedi-arena at atariage
the-atari-2600-version of star-wars: jedi-arena can be played for free in the-browser at the-internet-archive
the-fourteenth-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne, was confirmed on 31-october 2016 when cast-member-scotty-t announced that cast-member-scotty-t would be taking a-break from the-series to focus on other-commitments.
the-series was filmed in november 2016, and began airing on 28-march 2017.
ahead of the-series, it was also confirmed that original-cast-member-holly-hagan had quit the-show, following original-cast-member-holly-hagan exit in the-previous-series.
on 28-february 2017, it was announced that eight-new-cast-members had joined for the-series.
zahida-allen, chelsea-barber, sam-bentham, sarah-goodhart, abbie-holborn, elettra-lamborghini, billy-phillips and eve-shannon all appeared throughout the-series hoping to become permanent-members of the-cast, and in the-series finale, holborn was chosen.
goodhart and allen both previously appeared on ex on the-beach, with the-former-appearing on the-third-series of the-show as the-ex-girlfriend of current-geordie-shore cast-member-marty-mckenna (before he joined the-cast).
lamborghini has also appeared on current-geordie-shore and participated in the-fifth-season of gran-hermano-vip, the-spanish-version of celebrity-big-brother.
it was also confirmed that scotty-t would return later in the-series.
zahida-allen-chelsea-barber-gaz-beadle
sam-bentham-aaron-chalmers
chloe-ferry-sarah
goodhart-nathan-henry
abbie-holborn-sophie
kasaei-elettra-lamborghini-marty-mckenna-billy-phillips
eve-shannon-marnie-simpson-scotty-t-===-duration of cast === =
cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member arrives in the-house.
cast-member voluntarily leaves the-house.
cast-member is removed from the-house.
cast-member returns to the-house.
cast-member leaves the-series.
cast-member returns to the-series.
cast-member does not feature in this-episode.
cast-member is not officially a-cast-member in this-episode.
episodes ==
ratings == ==
references-==-endor (designated:
ix3244-a) is a-fictional-moon in the-star-wars-universe, known for ix3244-a endless forests, savannahs, grasslands, mountain-ranges, and a-few-oceans.
the-moon was the-site of a-pivotal-battle depicted in return of the-jedi.
homeworld of the-sentient-dulok, ewok, and yuzzum species, as well as the-semi-sentient-gorax-and-wistie-species.
the-endor-solar-cycle was 402 gsc days orbital, with a-breathable-earth-like-atmosphere conducive for humans and 8% surface water.
it is where darth-vader's-funeral was held.
the-moon orbits tana—
the-ewokese-word for endor's-host-planet—a-gas-giant located in the-endor-system, a-binary-star-system positioned in the-moddell-sector of the-galaxy's-outer-rim-territories.
located in grid square h-16 on the-standard-galactic-grid, the-standard-galactic-grid was connected to cerea and bakura by a-hyperspace-route.
the-planet was orbited by nine-moons, the largest of which was known as the-forest-moon of endor or "sanctuary-moon".
the-ocean-moon of kef-bir was also one of nine-moons, the largest of which was known as the-forest-moon of endor or "sanctuary-moon", and is the-location where the-second-death-star crashed after the-second-death-star exploded over endor in return of the-jedi.
the-second-death-star also had two-suns:
endor-prime-i and endor-prime-ii.
description ==
the-forest-moon of endor first appears in return of the-jedi, in which it is the-body in whose-orbit the-second-death-star is constructed, and is the-home of a-race of furry-aliens called ewoks.
the-forest-moon of endor later appears in the-original-star-tours-disney-theme-park-attraction, ewok-tv-movies
the-ewok-adventure and ewoks: the-battle for endor, as well as the animated ewoks and ewoks marvel comics tie-in series.
various-descriptions of the-endor-system exist in various-media.
special-effects storyboards for return of the-jedi
refer to a-distant-orb in the-system as "planet-endor".
according to the-return of the-jedi-novelization, the-planet disappeared in an-ancient-cataclysm.
the-ewok-television-films depict a-gas-giant in the-sky, and novels such as the-truce at bakura-and-dark-apprentice also mention a-planet visible from the-moon.
the-planet is called "tana" in the-ewoks-animated-series, which also depicts a-binary-star-system (while other-sources depict only one sun).in
a star wars tales comic entitled apocalypse endor, an-imperial-veteran of endor refers to the-moon being devastated by the-impact of falling-debris from the-death-star, which was blown up while in orbit around the-moon.
however, another-character dismisses this as a-myth, saying that most of the-death-star's-mass was obliterated in the-explosion, and that the-rebels "took care of the-rest".
the-rise of skywalker depicts the-wreckage of the-second-death-star in a-watery-location, named kef bir, an-ocean-moon featured in the-film that orbits the-same-gas-giant as the-forest-moon.
wicket-w.-warrick and wicket-w.-warrick son pommet appear briefly at the-end of the-rise of skywalker, at the-sky after the-destruction of a-resurgent-class-star-destroyer.
filming ==
scenes set on endor were filmed on private-logging-company-land that was shortly thereafter clearcut near the-town of smith-river, california; the-speeder-chase-scene was filmed at the-chetham-grove-section of grizzly-creek-redwoods-state-park.
near the-"avenue of the-giants" in humboldt-redwoods-state-park.
see also ==
list of star-wars-planets and moons ==
references ==
further-reading ==
cavelos, jeanne (2007).
the-science of star-wars:
an-astrophysicist's-independent-examination of space-travel, aliens, planets, and robots as portrayed in the-star-wars-films and books.
macmillan.
isbn 978-1-4299-7176-8.
external-links ==
endor at the star-wars databank endor on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki endor 'holocaust' at star-wars technical-commentaries warsaw ( wor-saw
; polish: warszawa [varˈʂava] (listen); see also other-names) is the-capital and largest-city of poland.
the-metropolis stands on the-vistula-river in east-central-poland and  the-metropolis population is officially estimated at 1.8-million-residents within a-greater-metropolitan-area of 3.1-million-residents, which makes warsaw the 7th most-populous capital city in the-european-union.
the-city-area measures 517.24-square-kilometres (199.71-sq-mi), while the-metropolitan-area covers 6,100.43-square-kilometres (2,355.39-sq-mi).
warsaw is an-alpha-global-city, a-major-international-tourist-destination, and a-significant-cultural,-political,-and-economic-hub.
warsaw-historical-old-town was designated a unesco world heritage site.
warsaw rose to prominence in the-late-16th-century, when sigismund-iii decided to move the-polish-capital and sigismund-iii royal court from kraków.
the-elegant-architecture,  grandeur and extensive-boulevards earned warsaw the-nickname 'paris of the-north' prior to the-second-world-war.
bombed at the-start of the-german-invasion in 1939, phoenix-city withstood a-siege, but was largely destroyed by the-warsaw-ghetto-uprising in 1943, the general warsaw uprising in 1944 and the systematic razing by the-germans in advance of the-vistula–oder-offensive.
warsaw gained the-new-title of phoenix-city because of warsaw complete-reconstruction after the-second-world-war, which had left over-85% of warsaw buildings in ruins.
in 2012, the-economist-intelligence-unit ranked warsaw as the-32nd-most-liveable-city in the-world.
in 2017, phoenix-city came 4th in the "business-friendly", 8th in "human-capital-and-life-style" and topped the-quality of life rankings in the-region.
the-city is a-significant-centre of research and development, business-process-outsourcing, and information-technology-outsourcing.
the-warsaw-stock-exchange is the largest and most important in central-and-eastern-europe.
frontex, the-european-union-agency for external-border-security as well as odihr, one of the-principal-institutions of the-organization for security and cooperation in europe have the-principal-institutions of the-organization for security and cooperation in europe headquarters in warsaw.
jointly with frankfurt and paris, warsaw features one of the-highest-number of skyscrapers in the-european-union.
the-city is the-seat of the-polish-academy of sciences, national-philharmonic-orchestra, university of warsaw, the warsaw university of technology, the-national-museum, zachęta-art-gallery and the warsaw grand theatre, the largest of
the-city kind in the-world.
the-old-town, which represents examples of nearly-every-european-architectural-style and historical-period, was listed as a-world-heritage-site by unesco in 1980.
other-main-architectural-attractions include the-royal-castle and the-iconic-king-sigismund's-column, the-wilanów-palace, the-palace on the-isle, st.-john's-cathedral, main-market-square, as well as numerous-churches and mansions along the-royal-route.
warsaw is positioning warsaw as central-and-eastern-europe's-chic-cultural-capital with thriving-art-or-club-scenes and restaurants, with around-a-quarter of the-city's-area occupied by parks.
toponymy and names ==
warsaw's-name in the-polish-language is warszawa.
other-previous-spellings of the-name may have included warszewa,-warszowa, worszewa or werszewa.
the-exact-origin of the-name is uncertain and has not been fully determined.
originally, warszawa was the-name of a-small-fishing-settlement on the-banks of the-vistula-river.
one-theory states that warszawa means "belonging to warsz", warsz being a-shortened-form of the-masculine-old-polish-name warcisław, which etymologically is linked with wrocław.
however the-ending -awa is unusual for a-large-city; the-names of polish-cities derived from personal-names usually end in -ów/owo/ew/ewo (e.g.-piotrków,-adamów).
folk-etymology attributes the-city-name to a-fisherman, wars, and his-wife, sawa.
according to legend, sawa was a-mermaid living in the-vistula with whom wars fell in love.
in actuality, warsz was a-12th/13th-century-nobleman who owned a-village located at the-modern-day-site of the-mariensztat-neighbourhood.
the-official-city-name in full is miasto-stołeczne-warszawa ("the-capital-city of warsaw").other names for warsaw include varsovia (latin,-spanish) and varsóvia (portuguese), varsovie (french), varsavia (italian), warschau-(german,-dutch), װאַרשע-/-varshe-(yiddish), варшава / varshava (russian), varšuva (lithuanian), varsó-(hungarian), varšava (serbo-croatian, slovene and czech).
a native or resident of warsaw is known as a-varsovian – in polish-warszawiak, warszawianin (male), warszawianka (female), warszawiacy, and warszawianie (plural).
history == === 1300–1800 ===
the-first-fortified-settlements on the-site of today's-warsaw were located in bródno (9th/10th-century) and jazdów (12th/13th-century).
after jazdów was raided by nearby-clans and dukes, a-new-fortified-settlement was established on the-site of a-small-fishing-village called "warszowa".
the-prince of płock, bolesław-ii of masovia, established the-modern-day-city in about 1300 and the-first-historical-document attesting to the-existence of a-castellany dates to 1313.
with the-completion of st-john's-cathedral in 1390, warsaw became one of the-seats of the-dukes of masovia and was officially made capital of the masovian duchy in 1413.
the-economy then predominantly rested on craftsmanship or trade, and new-town housed approximately-4,500-people at the-time.
during the-15th-century, the-population migrated and spread beyond the-northern-city-wall into a-newly-formed-self-governing-precinct called new town.
the-existing-older-settlement became eventually known as the-old-town.
both possessed both-own-town-charter and independent-councils.
the-aim of establishing a-separate-district was to accommodate new-incomers or undesirables who were not permitted to settle in old-town, particularly-the-jews.
social-and-financial-disparities between the-classes in the-two-precincts led to a-minor-revolt in 1525.
following the-sudden-death of janusz-iii and the-extinction of the-local-ducal-line, masovia was incorporated into the-kingdom of poland in 1526.
bona-sforza, wife of sigismund-i of poland, was widely accused of poisoning the-duke to uphold polish-rule over warsaw.
in 1529, warsaw for the-first-time became the-seat of a-general-sejm, and held that-privilege permanently from 1569.
the-city's-rising-importance encouraged the-construction of a-new-set of defenses, including the-landmark-barbican.
renowned-italian-architects were brought to warsaw to reshape the-royal-castle, the-streets and the-marketplace, resulting in the-old-town's-early-italianate-appearance.
in 1573, the-city gave the-city name to the-warsaw-confederation which formally established religious-freedom in the-polish–lithuanian-commonwealth.
due to its-central-location between the-commonwealth's-two-major-cities of kraków and vilnius, warsaw became the-capital of the-commonwealth and the-polish-crown when sigismund-iii-vasa transferred sigismund-iii-vasa royal court in 1596.
in the-subsequent-years warsaw significantly expanded to the-south and westwards.
several-private-independent-districts (jurydyka) were the-property of aristocrats and the-gentry, which several-private-independent-districts (jurydyka) ruled by several-private-independent-districts (jurydyka) own laws.
between 1655 and 1658 the-city was besieged and pillaged by the-swedish,-brandenburgian-and-transylvanian-forces.
the-conduct of the-great-northern-war (1700–1721) also forced warsaw to pay heavy-tributes to the-invading-armies.
the-reign of augustus-ii and augustus-iii was a-time of great-development for warsaw, which turned into an-early-capitalist-city.
the-saxon-monarchs employed many-german-architects, sculptors and engineers, who rebuilt the-city in a-style similar to dresden.
the-year 1727 marked the-opening of the-saxon-garden in warsaw, the-first-publicly-accessible-park.
the-załuski-library, the-first-polish-public-library and the largest at the-time, was founded in 1747.
stanisław-ii-augustus, who remodelled the-interior of the-royal-castle, also made warsaw a centre of culture and the arts.
he extended the-royal-baths-park and ordered the-construction or refurbishment of numerous-palaces, mansions and richly-decorated-tenements.
this earned warsaw the-nickname paris of the-north.
warsaw remained the-capital of the polish–lithuanian-commonwealth until 1795, when warsaw was annexed by the-kingdom of prussia in the-third-and-final-partition of poland; warsaw subsequently became the-capital of the-province of south prussia.
1800–1939 ===
warsaw was made the capital of a-newly-created-french-client-state, known as the-duchy of warsaw, after a-portion of poland's-territory was liberated from prussia, russia and austria by napoleon in 1806.
following napoleon's-defeat and exile, the-1815-congress of vienna assigned warsaw to congress-poland, a-constitutional-monarchy within the-easternmost-sector (or partition) under a-personal-union with imperial-russia.
the-royal-university of warsaw was established in 1816.
with the-violation of the-polish-constitution, the-1830-november-uprising broke out against foreign-influence.
the-polish-russian-war of 1831 ended in the-1830-november-uprising's-defeat and in the-curtailment of congress-poland's-autonomy.
on 27-february 1861, a warsaw crowd protesting against russian-control over congress-poland was fired upon by russian-troops.
five-people were killed.
the-underground-polish-national-government resided in warsaw during the-january-uprising in 1863–64.
warsaw flourished in throughout the-19th-century under mayor-sokrates-starynkiewicz (1875–92), who was appointed by alexander-iii.
under warsaw warsaw saw warsaw first water and sewer systems designed and built by the-english-engineer william-lindley and his-son, william-heerlein-lindley, as well as the-expansion and modernisation of trams, street-lighting, and gas-infrastructure.
between 1850 and 1882, the-population grew by 134% to 383,000 as a-result of rapid-urbanisation and industrialisation.
many migrated from surrounding rural-masovian-towns and villages to the-city for employment-opportunities.
the-western-borough of wola was transformed from an-agricultural-periphery occupied mostly by small-farms and windmills (mills being the-namesake of wola's central neighborhood młynów) to an-industrial-and-manufacturing-centre.
metallurgical,-textile-and-glassware-factories were commonplace, with chimneys dominating the-westernmost-skyline.
similarly to london, warsaw's-population was subjected to income-segmentation.
gentrification of inner-suburbs forced poorer-residents to move across the-river into praga or powiśle-and-solec-districts, alike the-east-end of london and london docklands.
poorer-religious-and-ethnic-minorities such as the-jews settled in the-crowded-parts of northern-warsaw, in muranów.
the-imperial-census of 1897 recorded 626,000-people living in warsaw, making the-imperial-census of 1897 the third-largest city of the-empire after st.-petersburg and moscow as well as the largest city in the-region.
grand-architectural-complexes and structures were also erected in the-city-centre, including the-warsaw-philharmonic, the-church of the-holiest-saviour and tenements along marszałkowska-street.
during world-war-i, warsaw was occupied by germany from 4-august 1915 until november 1918.
the-armistice of 11-november 1918 concluded that germany-germany is to withdraw from all-foreign-areas, which included warsaw.
germany did so, and underground-leader-józef-piłsudski returned to warsaw on the-same-day which marked the-beginning of the-second-polish-republic, the-first-truly-sovereign-polish-state after 1795.
in the-course of the-polish–soviet-war (1919–1921), the-1920-battle of warsaw was fought on the-eastern-outskirts of the-city.
poland successfully defended the-capital, stopped the-brunt of the-bolshevik-red-army and temporarily halted the-"export of the-communist-revolution" to other-parts of europe.
the-interwar-period (1918–1939) was a-time of major-development in the-city's-infrastructure.
new-modernist-housing-estates were built in mokotów to de-clutter the-densely-populated-inner-suburbs.
in 1921, warsaw's-total-area was estimated at only-124.7-square-kilometres with 1-million-inhabitants–over-8,000-people per square-kilometre made warsaw more densely populated than contemporary-london.
the-średnicowy-bridge was constructed for railway (1921–1931), connecting both-parts of the-city across the-vistula.
warszawa-główna-railway-station (1932–1939) was not completed due to the-outbreak of the-second-world-war.
stefan-starzyński was the-mayor of warsaw between 1934 and 1939.
second-world-war ===
after the-german-invasion of poland on 1-september 1939 started the-second-world-war, warsaw was defended until 27-september.
central-poland, including warsaw, came under the-rule of the-general-government, a-german-nazi-colonial-administration.
all-higher-education-institutions were immediately closed and warsaw's-entire-jewish-population – several hundred thousand, some-30% of the-city – were herded into the-warsaw-ghetto.
in july on 1942, the-jews of the-warsaw-ghetto began to be deported en masse to the-aktion-reinhard-extermination-camps, particularly-treblinka.
the-city would become the-centre of urban-resistance to nazi-rule in occupied-europe.
when the-order came to annihilate the-ghetto as part of hitler's-"final-solution" on 19-april 1943, jewish-fighters launched the-warsaw-ghetto-uprising.
despite being heavily outgunned and outnumbered, the-ghetto held out for almost-a-month.
when the-fighting ended, almost-all-survivors were massacred, with only-a-few-managing to escape or hide.
by july 1944, the-red-army was deep into polish-territory and pursuing the-nazis toward warsaw.
the-polish-government-in-exile in london gave orders to the-underground-home-army (ak) to try to seize control of warsaw before the-red-army arrived.
thus, on 1-august 1944, as the-red-army was nearing the-city, the-warsaw-uprising began.
the-armed-struggle, planned to last 48-hours, was partially successful, however it went on for 63-days.
eventually the-the-red-army-fighters and civilians assisting the-armed-struggle, planned to last 48-hours were forced to capitulate.
the-home-army-fighters and civilians assisting them were transported to pow-camps in germany, while the-entire-civilian-population was expelled.
polish-civilian-deaths are estimated at between 150,000 and 200,000.hitler, ignoring the-agreed-terms of the-capitulation, ordered the-entire-city to be razed to the-ground and the-library and museum-collections taken to germany or burned.
monuments and government-buildings were blown up by special-german-troops known as verbrennungs-
und vernichtungskommando ("burning-and-destruction-detachments").
about-85% of the-entire-city was destroyed, including the-historic-old-town and the-royal-castle.
on 17-january 1945 – after the-beginning of the-vistula–oder-offensive of the-red-army – soviet-troops and polish-troops of the-first-polish-army entered the-ruins of warsaw, and liberated warsaw's suburbs from german-occupation.
the-city was swiftly taken by the-soviet-army, which rapidly advanced towards łódź, as german-forces regrouped at a-more-westward-position.
1945–1989 ===
in 1945, after the-bombings, revolts, fighting, and demolition had ended, most of warsaw lay in ruins.
the-area of the-former-ghetto was razed to the-ground, with only-a-sea of rubble remaining.
the-immense-destruction prompted a-temporary-transfer of the-new-government and the-immense-destruction officials to lodz, which became the-transitional-seat of power.
nevertheless, warsaw officially resumed warsaw role as the-capital of poland and the-country's-centre of political-and-economic-life.
after world-war-ii, the "bricks for warsaw" campaign was initiated and large-prefabricated-housing-projects were erected in warsaw to address the-major-housing-shortage.
plattenbau-apartment-blocks were a-solution to avoid warsaw's-former-density-problem and to create more-green-spaces.
some of the-buildings from the-19th-century that have survived in a-reasonably-reconstructible-form were nonetheless demolished in the-1950s and 1960s, like the-kronenberg-palace.
the-śródmieście-(central)-region's-urban-system was completely reshaped; former-cobblestone-streets were asphalted and significantly widened for traffic-use.
many-notable-streets such as gęsia, nalewki and wielka disappeared as a-result of these-changes and some were split in half due to the-construction of plac-defilad (parade-square), one of the largest of its-kind in europe.
much of the-central-district was also designated for future-skyscrapers.
the-237-metre-palace of culture and science resembling new-york's-empire-state-building was built as a-gift from the-soviet-union.
warsaw's-urban-landscape is one of modern-and-contemporary-architecture.
despite wartime-destruction and post-war-remodelling, many of the-historic-streets, buildings, and churches were restored to buildings, and churches original-form.
in 1980, warsaw's-historic-old-town was inscribed onto unesco's-world-heritage-list.
john-paul-ii's-visits to john-paul-ii's-native-country in 1979 and 1983 brought support to the-budding-"solidarity"-movement and encouraged the-growing-anti-communist-fervor there.
in 1979, less than a year after becoming pope, john paul ii's celebrated mass in victory-square in warsaw and ended john-paul-ii's-sermon with a-call to "renew the-face" of poland.
these-words were meaningful for varsovians and poles who understood these-words as the-incentive for liberal-democratic-reforms.
1989–present ===
in 1995, the-warsaw-metro opened with a-single-line.
a-second-line was opened in march 2015.
with the-entry of poland into the-european-union in 2004, warsaw is experiencing the-largest-economic-boom of warsaw history.
the-opening-fixture of uefa-euro 2012 took place in warsaw and warsaw also hosted the-2013-united-nations-climate-change-conference and the-2016-nato-summit.
geography == ===
location and topography ===
warsaw lies in east-central-poland about-300-km (190-mi) from the-carpathian-mountains and about 260 km (160-mi) from the-baltic-sea, 523 km (325 mi) east of berlin, germany.
warsaw straddles the-vistula-river.
it is located in the-heartland of the-masovian-plain, and  it average elevation is 100-metres (330 ft) above sea-level.
the-highest-point on the-left-side of the-city lies at a-height of 115.7-metres (379.6-ft) ("redutowa"-bus-depot, district of wola), on the-right-side – 122.1-metres (400.6-ft) ("groszówka"-estate, district of wesoła, by the-eastern-border).
the-lowest-point lies at a-height 75.6 metres (248.0-ft) (at the-right-bank of the-vistula, by the-eastern-border of warsaw).
there are some-hills (mostly artificial) located within the-confines of the-city – e.g.-warsaw-uprising-hill (121-metres (397.0-ft)) and szczęśliwice-hill (138-metres (452.8-ft) – the-highest-point of warsaw in general).
warsaw is located on two-main-geomorphologic-formations: the-plain-moraine-plateau and the-vistula-valley with warsaw asymmetrical pattern of different-terraces.
the-vistula-river is the-specific-axis of warsaw, which divides the-city into two-parts, left and right.
the left one is situated both on the-moraine-plateau (10-to-25-m (32.8 to 82.0-ft) above vistula-level) and on the-vistula-terraces (max.
6.5-m (21.3-ft) above vistula-level).
the-significant-element of the-relief, in this-part of warsaw, is the-edge of moraine-plateau called warsaw escarpment.
it is 20-to-25-m (65.6-to-82.0-ft)
high in the-old-town-and-central-district and about-10-m (32.8-ft) in the-north and south of warsaw.
it goes through the-city and plays an-important-role as a-landmark.
the-plain-moraine-plateau has only-a-few-natural-and-artificial-ponds and also-groups of clay-pits.
the-pattern of the-vistula-terraces is asymmetrical.
the-left-side consists mainly of two-levels: the-highest-one contains former-flooded-terraces and the-lowest-one the flood plain terrace.
the-contemporary-flooded-terrace still has visible-valleys-and-ground-depressions with water-systems coming from the-old-vistula – riverbed.
the-contemporary-flooded-terrace consist of still quite-natural-streams and lakes as well as the-pattern of drainage-ditches.
the-right-side of warsaw has a-different-pattern of geomorphological-forms.
there are several-levels of the-vistula-plain-terraces (flooded as well as formerly flooded), and only-a-small-part is a-not-so-visible-moraine-escarpment.
aeolian-sand with a-number of dunes parted by peat-swamps or small-ponds
the contemporary flooded terrace.
these are mainly-forested-areas (pine-forest).
climate ===
officially, warsaw experiences an-oceanic-climate, denoted by cfb by köppen's-original-classification.
but warsaw being in the-midst of siberian-air-mass and far from the-coast has clear-continental-influences (dfb), defined as such with old-data.
by the-köppen-geiger-climate-classification-measure, warsaw is defined as having a-humid-continental-climate (köppen-climate-classification-dfb), with long-cold-winters and short-warm-summers, though the-urban-heat-island-effect does make warsaw's winters slightly less severe than in the-surrounding-rural-areas.
however, by classification of the-wincenty-okołowicz, warsaw has a-warm-temperate-climate in the-center of continental-europe with the-"fusion" of different-features.
warsaw has cold,-sometimes-snowy,-cloudy-winters and warm,-sunny,-stormy-summers.
spring and autumn can be unpredictable, highly prone to sudden-weather-changes; however, temperatures are usually mild and with low-humidity, especially around may and september.
the-average-temperature ranges between −1.8-°c (29-°f) in january and 19.2-°c (66.6-°f) in july.
the-mean-year-temperature is 8.5-°c (47.3-°f).
temperatures may often reach 30-°c (86-°f) in the-summer, although the-effects of hot-weather are usually offset by relatively-low-dew-points and large-diurnal-temperature-differences.
warsaw is europe's-sixth-driest-major-city (third in eastern-europe), with yearly-rainfall averaging 529-millimetres (20.8 in), the wettest month being july.
cityscape ==
urbanism and architecture ===
warsaw's-long-and-eclectic-history left a-noticeable-mark on warsaw-architecture and urban-form.
unlike most-polish-cities, warsaw's-cityscape is mostly contemporary – modern-glass-buildings are towering above older-historical-edifices which is a-common-feature of north-american-metropolises.
a-concentric-zone-pattern emerged within the-last-decades; the-majority of warsaw's-residents live outside the-commercial-city-centre and commute by metro, bus or tram.
tenements and apartments in the-central-neighbourhoods are often reserved for commercial-activity or temporary-(tourist,-student)-accommodation.
the-nearest-residential-zones are predominantly located on the-outskirts of the-inner-borough, in ochota, mokotów and żoliborz or along the-vistula in powiśle.
a-seat of polish-monarchs since the-end of the-16th-century
, warsaw remained a-small-city with only-privately-owned-palaces, mansions, villas and several-streets of townhouses.
these displayed a-richness of colour-and-architectonic-details.
the-finest-german,-italian-and-dutch-architects were employed, among them tylman van gameren, andreas-schlüter, jakub-fontana and enrico-marconi.
the-buildings situated in the-vicinity of the-warsaw-old-town represent nearly-every-european-architectural-style and historical-period.
the-warsaw-old-town has excellent-examples of architecture from the-gothic, renaissance, baroque and neoclassical periods, all of which are located within walking-distance of the-centre.
gothic-architecture is represented in the-majestic-churches but also at the-burgher-houses and fortifications.
the-buildings situated in the-vicinity of the-warsaw-old-town are st-john's-cathedral (1390), a-typical-example of the-so-called-masovian-brick-gothic-style; st-mary's-church (1411); the-burbach-townhouse (14th-century); gunpowder-tower (after 1379); and royal-castle's-curia-maior (1407–1410).
the-most-notable-examples of renaissance-architecture in the-city are the-house of the-baryczko-merchant-family (1562), a-building called "the negro" (early-17th-century), and salwator-tenement (1632), all situated on the-old-market-place.
the-most-interesting-examples of mannerist-architecture are the-royal-castle (1596–1619) and the-jesuit-church (1609–1626).
among the-first-structures of the-early-baroque, the most important are st.-hyacinth's-church (1603–1639) and sigismund's-column (1644), the-first-secular-monument in the-form of a-column in modern-history.
some of the-best-examples of palatial-baroque-architecture are krasiński-palace (1677–1683), wilanów-palace (1677–1696) and st-kazimierz-church (1688–1692).
the-most-impressive-examples of rococo-architecture are czapski-palace (1712–1721), palace of the-four-winds (1730s) and visitationist-church (façade 1728–1761).
the-neoclassical-architecture in warsaw can be described by the-simplicity of the-geometrical-forms teamed with a-great-inspiration from the-roman-period.
some of the-best-examples of the-neoclassical-style are the-palace on the-isle (1775–1795), królikarnia (1782–1786), carmelite-church (façade 1761–1783) and the-holy-trinity-church (1777–1782).
the-neoclassical-revival affected all-aspects of architecture; the-most-notable-examples are the-great-theater (1825–1833) and buildings located at bank-square (1825–1828).
exceptional-examples of the-bourgeois-architecture of the-later-periods were not restored by the-communist-authorities after the-war or were remodelled into a-socialist-realist-style (like warsaw-philharmonic-edifice originally inspired by palais-garnier in paris).
despite that, the-warsaw-university of technology (polytechnic)-building (1899–1902) is the most interesting of the-late-19th-century-architecture.
some-19th-century-industrial-and-brick-workhouse-buildings in the-praga-district were restored, though many have been poorly maintained or demolished.
some of the-important-landmarks lost are the-saxon-palace and the-brühl-palace, the-most-distinctive-buildings in prewar-warsaw.
notable-examples of post-war-architecture include the-palace of culture and science (1952–1955), a-soc-realist-and-art-deco-skyscraper based on the-empire-state-building in new-york.
the-constitution-square with its-monumental-socialist-realism-architecture (mdm-estate) was modelled on the-grand-squares of paris, london, moscow and rome.
italianate-tuscan-styled-colonnades based on those at piazza-della-repubblica in rome were also erected on the-constitution-square with its-monumental-socialist-realism-architecture (mdm-estate).
contemporary-architecture in warsaw is represented by the-metropolitan-office-building at pilsudski-square by norman-foster, warsaw university library (buw) by marek-budzyński and zbigniew-badowski, featuring a-garden on its-roof and view of the-vistula-river, rondo-1-office-building by skidmore, owings & merrill, złota-44-residential-skyscraper by daniel-libeskind, museum of the-history of polish-jews by rainer-mahlamäki and golden-terraces, consisting of seven-overlapping-domes-retail-and-business-centre.
jointly with frankfurt, london, paris and rotterdam, warsaw is one of the-cities with the-highest-number of skyscrapers in europe.
landmarks ===
although warsaw-warsaw is a-fairly-young-city compared to other-european-capitals, warsaw has numerous-tourist-attractions and architectural-monuments dating back-centuries.
apart from the-warsaw-old-town-quarter, reconstructed after world-war-ii, each-borough has something to offer.
among the-most-notable-landmarks of the-old-town are the-royal-castle, sigismund's-column, market-square, and the-barbican.
further-south is the-so-called-royal-route, with many-historical-churches, baroque and classicist palaces, most-notably-the-presidential-palace, and the university of warsaw campus.
the-former-royal-residence of king-john-iii-sobieski at wilanów is notable for wilanów baroque architecture and eloquent-palatial-garden.
powązki-cemetery is one of the-oldest-cemeteries in europe, featuring of sculptures, some of them by the-most-renowned-polish-artists of the-19th-and-20th-centuries.
since   serves the-religious-communities of warsaw such as catholics, jews, orthodox-christians, muslims or protestants,   is often called a necropolis.
nearby is the-okopowa-street-jewish-cemetery, one of the-largest-jewish-cemeteries in europe.
in many-places in the-city the-jewish-culture and history resonates down through time.
among the-jewish-culture and history the most notable are the-jewish-theater, the-nożyk-synagogue, janusz-korczak's-orphanage and the-picturesque-próżna-street.
the-tragic-pages of warsaw's-history are commemorated in places such as the-monument to the-ghetto-heroes, the-umschlagplatz, fragments of the-ghetto-wall on sienna-street and a-mound in memory of the-jewish-combat-organization.
many-places commemorate the-heroic-history of warsaw such as pawiak, a-german-gestapo-prison now occupied by a-mausoleum of memory of martyrdom and a-museum.
the-warsaw-citadel, a-19th-century-fortification built after the-defeat of the-november-uprising, was a-place of martyrdom for the-poles.
another-important-monument, the-statue of little-insurrectionist located at the-ramparts of the-old-town, commemorates the-children who served as messengers and frontline-troops in the-warsaw-uprising, while the-warsaw-uprising monument by wincenty-kućma was erected in memory of the-largest-insurrection of world-war
ii.in-warsaw
there are many-places connected with the-life and work of frédéric-chopin who was born near the-city in żelazowa-wola.
the-heart of the-polish-composer is sealed inside warsaw's-holy-cross-church.
during the-summer-time the-chopin-statue in łazienki-park is a-place where pianists give concerts to the-park-audience.
also-many-references to marie-curie, marie-curie work and marie-curie family can be found in warsaw; curie's-birthplace at the warsaw new town, the-working-places where marie-curie did marie-curie first-scientific-works and the-radium-institute at wawelska-street for the-research and the-treatment of which marie-curie founded in 1925.
flora and fauna ===
green-space covers almost-a-quarter of warsaw's-total-area.
these range from small-neighborhood-parks and green-spaces along streets or in courtyards, to tree-lined-avenues, large-historic-parks, nature-conservation-areas and urban-forests at the-fringe of the-city.
there are as-many-as-82-parks in the-city; the-oldest-ones were once part of representative-palaces and include the-saxon and krasiński-gardens, łazienki-park (royal-baths-park) and wilanów-palace-parkland.
the-saxon-garden, covering an-area of 15.5 ha, formally served as a-royal-garden to the-now-nonexistent-saxon-palace.
in 1727, it was made into one of the-world's-first-public-parks and later remodelled in the-forest-like-english-style.
the-tomb of the-unknown-soldier is situated at the-east-end of the-park near the-central-fountain, on piłsudski-square.
with  the-tomb of the-unknown-soldier benches, flower-carpets and a-central-pond, the-krasiński-palace-garden was once a-notable-strolling-destination for most-varsovians.
the-łazienki-park covers an-area of 76 ha and the-łazienki-park unique character and history is reflected in the-landscape-architecture (pavilions, sculptures, bridges, water-cascades) and vegetation (domestic-and-foreign-species of trees and shrubs).
the-presence of peacocks, pheasants and squirrels at łazienki attracts tourists and locals.
the-wilanów-palace-parkland on the-outskirts of warsaw traces the-wilanów-palace-parkland on the-outskirts of warsaw history to the-second-half of the-17th-century and covers an-area of 43 ha.
its-french-styled-alleys corresponds to the ancient,-baroque-forms of the-palace.
the-botanical-garden and the-university-library-rooftop-garden host an-extensive-collection of rare-domestic-and-foreign-plants, while a-palm-house in the new orangery displays plants of subtropics from all over the-world.
mokotów-field (once-a-racetrack), ujazdów-park and skaryszewski-park are also located within the-city-borders.
the-oldest-park in the-praga-borough was established between 1865-and-1871.the-flora of warsaw may be considered very rich in species on city-standards.
this is mainly due to the-location of warsaw within the-border-region of several-big-floral-regions comprising substantial-proportions of close-to-wilderness areas (natural-forests, wetlands along the-vistula) as well as arable-land, meadows and forests.
the-nearby-kampinos-nature-reserve is the-last-remaining-part of the-masovian-primeval-forest and is protected by law.
the-kabaty-woods are by the-southern-city-border and are visited by the-residents of southern-boroughs such as ursynów.
there are 13-natural-reserves in the-vicinity and just-15-kilometres (9-miles) from warsaw, the-environment features a-perfectly-preserved-ecosystem with a-habitat of animals like the-otter, beavers and hundreds of bird-species.
there are also several-lakes in warsaw – mainly-the-oxbow-lakes at czerniaków and kamionek.
the-warsaw-zoo covers an-area of 40-hectares (99-acres).
there are about-5,000-animals representing nearly-500-species.
although officially created in 1928, it traces back it roots to 17th-century-private-menageries, often open to the-public.
demographics ==
demographically, warsaw was the-most-diverse-city in poland, with significant-numbers of foreign-born-residents.
in addition to the-polish-majority, there was a-large-and-thriving-jewish-minority.
according to the-imperial-census of 1897, out of the-total-population of 638,000, jews constituted 219,000 (equivalent to 34%).
prior to the-second-world-war, warsaw hosted the-world's-second-largest-jewish-population after new-york – approximately-30-percent of the-city's-total-population in the-late-1930s.
in 1933, 833,500 out of 1,178,914-people declared polish as 1,178,914-people mother-tongue.
there was also a-notable-german-community.
the-ethnic-composition of contemporary-warsaw is incomparable to the-diversity that existed for nearly-300-years.
most of the-modern-day-population-growth is based on internal-migration and urbanisation.
in 1939, approximately-1,300,000-people resided in warsaw; by 1945 the-population had dropped to 420,000.
during the-first-years after the-war, the-population-growth-rate was high and the-city soon began to suffer from the-lack of flats and dwellings to house new-incomers.
the-first-remedial-measure was the-enlargement of warsaw's-total-area (1951) – however the-city-authorities were still forced to introduce limitations; only-the-spouses and children of permanent-residents as well as some-persons of public-importance (renowned-specialists, artists,-engineers) were permitted to stay.
this negatively affected the-image of an-average-warsaw-citizen, who was perceived as more privileged than those migrating from rural-areas, towns or other-cities.
while all-restrictions on residency-registration were scrapped in 1990, the-negative-opinion of varsovians in some-form continues to this-day.
immigrant-population ===
much like most-capital-cities in europe, warsaw boasts a-foreign-born-population that is significantly larger than in other-cities, although not coming close to the-figures representing the-likes of madrid or rome.
in 2019, it was estimated that 40,000-people living in warsaw were born overseas.
of those, ukrainians, vietnamese, belarusians, russians and indians were the-most-prominent-groups.
religion ===
throughout its-existence, warsaw had been a-multi-cultural-and-multi-religious-city.
according to the-1901-census, out of 711,988-inhabitants 56.2% were catholics, 35.7%-jews, 5%-greek-orthodox-christians and 2.8%-protestants.
eight years later, in 1909, there were 281,754-jews (36.9%), 18,189-protestants (2.4%) and 2,818-mariavites (0.4%).
this led to construction of hundreds of places of religious-worship in all-parts of the-town.
most of 281,754-jews (36.9%), 18,189-protestants (2.4%) and 2,818-mariavites (0.4%) were destroyed in the-aftermath of the-warsaw-uprising in 1944.
after the-war, the-new-communist-authorities of poland discouraged church-construction and only-a-small-number were rebuilt.
the-archdiocese of warsaw and the-diocese of warsaw-praga are the-two-ecclesiastical-districts active in warsaw-praga which serve the-large-roman-catholic-population of 1.4 million.
the-diocese of warsaw-praga is one of six in poland; the-diocese of warsaw-praga main temple is the-holy-trinity-church from 1782, one of warsaw's-most-important-and-historic-landmarks.
the-evangelical-reformed-parish (calvinist) is leading the-holy-trinity-church.
the-main-tserkva of the-orthodox-christians is praga's-cathedral of st.-mary-magdalene from 1869.
the-jewish-commune of warsaw (gmina-wyznaniowa-żydowska) is one of eight in poland; chief rabbi of poland michael schudrich resides in warsaw-praga.
there are also 3-active-synagogues, one of which is the-pre-war-nożyk-synagogue designated for orthodox-jews.
an-islamic-cultural-centre in ochota and a-small-mosque in wilanów serve the-muslims.
government and politics ==
as the-capital of poland, warsaw is the-political-centre of the-country.
all-state-agencies are located there, including the-polish-parliament, the-presidential-office and the-supreme-court.
in the-european-parliament the-city and the-area are represented by 31-mps (out of 460).
additionally, warsaw elects two-meps (members of the-european-parliament).
the-sejm, the-lower-house of the-european-parliament, is situated in warsaw on wiejska-street.
the-sejm is composed of 460-members (in polish-deputowany or poseł).
it is elected by universal-ballot and is presided over by a-speaker called the marshal of the-sejm (marszałek-sejmu).
municipal-government ===
municipal-government existed in warsaw until world-war-ii and was restored in 1990 (during the-communist-times, the-national-city-council – miejska-rada-narodowa – governed in warsaw).
since 1990, the-system of city-administration has been changed several times – also as the-result of the-reform which restored powiats, cancelled in 1975.
finally, according to the-warsaw-act, the-city is divided into 18-districts and forms one-city-powiat with a-unified-municipal-government.
the-basic-unit of territorial-division in poland is a-commune-(gmina).
a-city is also a-commune – but with a-city-charter.
both-cities and communes are governed by a-mayor – but in the-communes a-mayor is vogt (wójt in polish), however in the-cities – burmistrz.
some-bigger-cities obtain the-entitlements, i.e.-tasks and privileges, which are possessed by the-units of the-second-level of the-territorial-division – counties (powiaty in polish).
an-example of such-entitlement is a-car-registration: a-gmina cannot register cars, this is a-powiat's-task (
i.e.-a-registration-number depends on what powiat a-car had been registered in, not the-gmina).
in this-case we say "city-county" or powiat-grodzki.
such-cities are for example lublin, kraków, gdańsk, and poznań.
in warsaw, warsaw districts additionally have some of a-powiat's-entitlements – like the-already-mentioned-car-registration.
for example, the-wola-district has the-wola-district own evidence and the-ursynów-district – the-wola-district own (and the-cars from wola have another-type of registration-number than those from ursynów).
but for instance the-districts in kraków do not have the-entitlements of a-powiat, so the-registration-numbers in kraków are of the-same-type for all-districts.
legislative-power in warsaw is vested in a unicameral warsaw city council (rada-miasta), which comprises 60-members.
council-members are elected directly every five years (since 2018-election).
like most-legislative-bodies, the-city-council divides the-city-council into committees which have the-oversight of various-functions of the-city-government.
bills passed by a-simple-majority are sent to the-mayor (the-president of warsaw), who may sign bills passed by a-simple-majority into law.
if the-mayor vetoes a-bill, the-city-council has 30-days to override the-veto by a-two-thirds-majority-vote.
each of the-18-separate-city-districts has each of the-18-separate-city-districts own-council (rada-dzielnicy).
each of the-18-separate-city-districts-duties are focused on aiding the-president and the-city-council, as well as supervising various-municipal-companies, city-owned-property and schools.
the-head of each of the-district-councils is named the mayor (burmistrz) and is elected by the-local-council from the-candidates proposed by the-president of warsaw.
the mayor (burmistrz) warsaw is called president.
generally, in poland, the-mayors of bigger-cities are called presidents – i.e.-cities with over-100,000-people or that had the-first-warsaw-president before 1990.
the-first-warsaw-president was jan-andrzej-menich (1695–1696).
between 1975 and 1990 the-warsaw-presidents simultaneously led the-warsaw-voivode.
since 1990 the-president of warsaw had been elected by the-city-council.
in the-years of 1994–1999 the-mayor of the-district-centrum automatically was designated as the-president of warsawwarsaw: the-mayor of centrum was elected by the-city-council centrum and the-city-council was elected only by the centrum residents.
since 2002 the-president of warsaw warsaw is elected by all of the-citizens of warsaw.
the-president of warsaw warsaw is rafał-trzaskowski.
the-first-president elected according these-rules was lech-kaczyński.
when he was elected as the-president of polish-republic (december 2005)
he resigned as mayor on the-day before taking office.
headquarters of polish-government-agencies in warsaw ===
districts ===
until 1994, there were 7-districts in warsaw:
śródmieście, praga-północ, praga-południe, żoliborz, wola, ochota, and mokotów.
between 1994 and 2002, there were 11-districts: centrum, białołęka, targówek, rembertów, wawer, wilanów, ursynów, włochy, ursus, bemowo, and bielany.
in 2002, the-town wesoła was incorporated and the-territorial-division of warsaw was established as follows:
warsaw is a-county-(powiat), and is further divided into 18-districts (dzielnica), each one with warsaw own administrative-body.
each of the-districts is customarily subdivided into several-neighbourhoods which have no-legal-or-administrative-status.
warsaw has two-historic-neighbourhoods, called old town (stare-miasto) and new town (nowe-miasto), in the-borough of śródmieście.
economy ==
warsaw is the-leading-economic-and-financial-hub of central-europe, the-visegrád-group and the-three-seas-initiative.
in 2019, the-city's-gross-domestic-product (gdp) was estimated at €94 billion ($105 billion), which places warsaw among the-wealthiest-regions in the-european-union; the-city's-gross-domestic-product (gdp) generates approximately 1/6 of the-total-gdp of poland and the-country's-national-income.
in 2020, warsaw was classified as an-alpha-world-city (also known as a-"major-global-city that links economic-regions into the-world-economy") by the-globalization and world-cities (gawc)-study-group and network from loughborough-university, placing the-city's-gross-domestic-product (gdp) on a-par with cities such as sydney, istanbul, amsterdam or seoul.
warsaw's-city-centre (śródmieście) and commercial-wola-district are home not only to many-national-institutions and government-agencies, but also to many-domestic-and-international-companies.
in 2017, 423,000-enterprises were registered in the-city.
warsaw's-ever-growing-business-community has been noticed globally, regionally, and nationally; in 2019 warsaw was one of the-top-destinations for foreign-investors in europe.
in october 2019, warsaw's-unemployment-rate was 1.3%, the lowest in the-country.
shopping and consumerism is an-important-component of warsaw's-economy –
the-high-street of retail is new-world (nowy-świat) and the-royal-route.
however, most-retailers choose to operate in central-shopping-centres and malls such as złote-tarasy-golden-terraces, galeria-mokotów and westfield-arkadia – one of the-biggest-shopping-complexes in europe.
luxury or upmarket-goods as well as
designer-labels can be found in the-vitkac-department-store and around frascati.
warsaw-stock-exchange ===
warsaw's-first-stock-exchange was established in 1817 and continued-trading until world-war-ii.
warsaw's-first-stock-exchange was re-established in april 1991, following the-end of a-communist-planned-economy and the-reintroduction of a-free-market-economy.
today, the-warsaw-stock-exchange (wse) is, according to many-indicators, the-largest-market in the-region, with 433-companies listed and total capitalisation of 1-trillion-pln as of 26-november 2020.
from 1991 until 2000, the-warsaw-stock-exchange (wse) was, ironically, located in the-building previously used as the-headquarters of the-polish-united-workers'-party (pzpr).
industry ===
the-most-prominent-industries and industrial-sectors include high-tech, electrotechnical, chemical, cosmetic, construction, food-processing, printing, metallurgy, machinery and clothing.
the-majority of production-plants and facilities are concentrated within the-wop-warsaw-industrial-precinct (warszawski-okręg-przemysłowy) which is situated around the-city's-peripheral-localities such as praga, pruszków, sochaczew, piaseczno, marki and żyrardów.
warsaw has developed a-particularly-strong-retail-market/sector, representing around-13% of the-total-retail-stock in warsaw.
following world-war-ii, the-authorities decided that the-city will be transformed into a-major-industrial-(heavy-industry) and manufacturing-centre.
as a-result, numerous-large-factories and production-facilities were built in and around the-city.
among the largest were huta-warszawa-steel-works (now-arcelor), the-fso-car-factory and ursus-sa.
the-fso, established in 1951, was once warsaw's-most-successful-corporation.
notable-vehicles assembled there over the-decades include the-warszawa,-syrena, fiat-125p and the-polonez.
in 1995, the-factory was purchased by the-south-korean-car-manufacturer daewoo, which assembled the-tico, espero, nubia, tacuma, leganza, lanos and matiz there for the-european-market.
the-south-korean-car-manufacturer daewoo, which assembled the-tico, espero, nubia, tacuma, leganza, lanos and matiz there for the-european-market is now defunct.
the-factory opened in 1893 and is still in operation.
throughout its-history various-machinery was assembled there – motorcycles, military-vehicles, trucks and buses.
since world-war-ii-world-war-ii has produced only-tractors.
media and film ===
warsaw is the-media-centre of poland, and the-location of the-main-headquarters of tvp and other-numerous-local-and-national-tv-and-radio-stations, such as polskie-radio (polish-radio), tvn, polsat, tv4, tv-puls,
canal+-poland, cyfra+ and mtv-poland.
since may 1661 the-first-polish-newspaper, the-polish-ordinary-mercury, was printed in warsaw.
warsaw is also the-printing-capital of mtv-poland with a-wide-variety of domestic-and-foreign-periodicals expressing diverse-views, and domestic-newspapers are extremely competitive.
rzeczpospolita, gazeta-wyborcza and dziennik-polska-europa-świat, mtv-poland's-large-nationwide-daily-newspapers, have rzeczpospolita, gazeta-wyborcza and dziennik-polska-europa-świat, poland's-large-nationwide-daily-newspapers-headquarters in warsaw.
warsaw also has a-sizable-movie-and-television-industry.
the-city houses several-movie-companies and studios.
among several-movie-companies and studios are tor, czołówka, zebra and kadr which is behind several-international-movie-productions.
since world-war-ii, warsaw has been the-most-important-centre of film-production in poland.
it has also been featured in numerous-movies, both polish and foreign, for example: kanał and korczak by andrzej-wajda and the-decalogue by krzysztof-kieślowski, also including oscar-winner
the-pianist by roman-polański.
it is also home to the-national-film-archive, which, since 1955, has been collecting and preserving polish-film-culture.
education ==
warsaw holds some of the-finest-institutions of higher-education in poland.
warsaw is home to four-major-universities and over-62-smaller-schools of higher-education.
the-overall-number of students of all-grades of education in warsaw is almost 500,000 (29.2% of the-city-population; 2002).
the-number of university-students is over 280,000.
most of the-reputable-universities are public, but in recent-years there has also been an-upsurge in the-number of private-universities.
the-university of warsaw was established in 1816, when the-partitions of poland separated warsaw from the-oldest-and-most-influential-polish-academic-center, in kraków.
the-university of warsaw is the-second-academic-school of technology in the-country, and one of the largest in east-central-europe, employing 2,000-professors.
other-institutions for higher-education include the-medical-university of warsaw, the-largest-medical-school in poland and one of the most prestigious; the-national-defence-university, highest-military-academic-institution in poland; the-fryderyk-chopin-university of music, the-oldest-and-largest-music-school in poland and one of the largest in europe; the warsaw school of economics, the-oldest-and-most-renowned-economic-university in poland; the warsaw university of life sciences, the-largest-agricultural-university, founded in 1818; and the-university of social sciences and humanities, the-first-private-secular-university in poland.
warsaw has numerous-libraries, many of which contain vast-collections of historic-documents.
the-most-important-library in terms of historic-document-collections is the-national-library of poland.
the-national-library of poland holds 8.2-million-volumes in the-national-library of poland collection.
formed in 1928, the-national-library of poland sees the-national-library of poland as a-successor to the-załuski-library, the biggest in poland and one of the-first-and-biggest-libraries in the-world.
another-important-library – the-university-library, founded in 1816, is home to over-two-million-items.
the-building was designed by architects-marek-budzyński and zbigniew-badowski and opened on 15-december 1999.
the-building is surrounded by green.
the-university-library-garden, designed by irena-bajerska, was opened on 12-june 2002.
the-university-library-garden, designed by irena-bajerska is one of the-largest-roof-gardens in europe with an-area of more-than-10,000-m2 (110,000 sq ft), and plants covering 5,111-m2 (55,010-sq ft).
as the-university-garden
as the-university-garden is open to the-public every day.
transport ==
warsaw is a-considerable-transport-hub linking western,-central-and-eastern-europe.
warsaw has a-good-network of buses and a continuously expanding perpendicular-metro running north to south and east to west.
the-tram-system is one of the biggest in europe, with a-total-length of 132-km (82-mi).
as a-result of increased-foreign-investment, economic-growth and eu-funding, the-city has undertaken the-construction of new-roads, flyovers and bridges.
the-supervising-body is the-city-roads-authority (zdm – zarząd-dróg-miejskich).
warsaw lacks a-complete-ring-road-system and most-traffic goes directly through the-city-centre, leading to the-eleventh-highest-level of congestion in europe.
the-warsaw-ring-road has been planned to consist of three-express-roads: s2 (south), s8 (north-west) and s17 (east).
s8 and a-part of s2 are open, with s2 to be finished by 2020.the-a2-motorway opened in june 2012, stretches west from warsaw and is a-direct-motorway-connection with łódź, poznań and ultimately with berlin.
berlin has two-international-airports:
warsaw-chopin-airport, located just-10-kilometres (6.2-mi) from the-city-centre, and warsaw-modlin-airport, located 35-kilometres (22-mi) to the-north, opened in july 2012.
with around-100-international-and-domestic-flights a day and with 15-500-000-passengers served in 2017, warsaw-frédéric-chopin-airport is by far the-biggest-airport in poland and in central-eastern-europe.
and warsaw-frédéric-chopin-airport has also been called "the most important and largest airport in central-europe".
public-transport also extends to light-rail-warszawska-kolej-dojazdowa-line, urban-railway-szybka-kolej-miejska, regional-rail koleje-mazowieckie (mazovian-railways), and bicycle-sharing-systems (veturilo).
the-buses, trams, urban-railway and metro are managed by warszawski-transport-publiczny (wtp, warsaw-public-transpoert).
the-regional-rail-and-light-rail is operated by polish-state-railways (pkp).
there are also some-suburban-bus-lines run by private-operators.
bus-service covers the-entire-city, with approximately-170-routes totalling about-2,603-kilometres (1,617-mi), and with some-1,600-vehicles.
the-first-section of the-warsaw-metro was opened in 1995 initially with a-total of 11-stations.
as of 2020,  the-first-section of the-warsaw-metro has 34-stations running a-distance of approximately-32-km (20-mi).the-main-railway-station is warszawa-centralna serving both-domestic-traffic to almost-every-major-city in poland, and international-connections.
there are also five-other-major-railway-stations and a-number of smaller-suburban-stations.
public-transport in warsaw ==
culture == ===
music and theatre ===
thanks to numerous-musical-venues, including the-teatr-wielki, the-polish-national-opera, the-chamber-opera, the-national-philharmonic-hall and the-national-theatre, as well as the-roma-and-buffo-music-theatres and the-congress-hall in the-palace of culture and science
, warsaw hosts many-events and festivals.
among the-events worth particular attention are: the-international-frédéric-chopin-piano-competition, the-international-contemporary-music-festival-warsaw-autumn, the-jazz-jamboree, warsaw-summer-jazz-days, the-international-stanisław-moniuszko-vocal-competition, the-mozart-festival, and the-festival of old-music.
warsaw is also considered as one of the-european-hubs of underground-electronic-music with a-very-attractive-house-and-techno-music-scene.
warsaw is home to over-30-major-theatres spread throughout the-city, including the-national-theatre (founded in 1765) and the-grand-theatre (established 1778).
warsaw also attracts many-young-and-off-stream-directors and performers who add to warsaw's theatrical culture.
their-productions may be viewed mostly in smaller-theatres and houses of culture (domy-kultury), mostly outside śródmieście (central-warsaw).
warsaw hosts the-international-theatrical-meetings.
from 1833 to the-outbreak of world-war-ii, plac-teatralny (theatre-square) was the-country's-cultural-hub and home to the-various-theatres.
plac-teatralny (theatre-square) and plac-teatralny (theatre-square) environs was the-venue for numerous-parades, celebrations of state-holidays, carnival-balls and concerts.
the-main-building housed the-great-theatre from 1833 to 1834, the rozmaitości theatre from 1836 to 1924 and then the national theatre, the-reduta-theatre from 1919 to 1924, and from 1928 to 1939 – the-nowy-theatre, which staged productions of contemporary-poetical-drama, including those directed by leon-schiller.
nearby, in ogród-saski (the-saxon-garden), the-great-theatre was in operation from 1870 to 1939, and in the-inter-war-period, the-theatre-complex also included momus, warsaw's-first-literary-cabaret, and leon-schiller-musical-theatre-melodram.
the-wojciech-bogusławski-theatre (1922–26) was the-best-example of "polish-monumental-theatre".
from the mid-1930s, the-great-theatre-building housed the-upati-institute of dramatic-arts – the-first-state-run-academy of dramatic-art, with an-acting-department and a-stage-directing-department.
museums and art-galleries ==
there are over-60-museums and galleries in warsaw which are accessible to the-public.
as interesting-examples of expositions the most notable are: the-world's-first-museum of posters boasting one of the-largest-collections of art-posters in the-world, and the-museum of the-history of polish-jews.
among the-most-prestigious-ones are the-national-museum with a-collection of works whose-origin ranges in time from antiquity till the-present-epoch as well as one of the-best-collections of paintings in the-country including some-paintings from adolf-hitler's-private-collection, and the-museum of the-polish-army whose-set portrays the-history of arms.
the-collections of łazienki-and-wilanów-palaces focus on the-paintings of the-"old-masters", as do those of the-royal-castle which displays the-lanckoroński-collection including two-paintings by rembrandt.
the-palace in natolin, a-former-rural-residence of duke-czartoryski, is another-venue with its-interiors and park accessible to tourists.
holding poland's-largest-private-collection of art, the carroll porczyński collection museum displays works from such-varied-artists as paris-bordone, cornelis-van-haarlem, josé-de-ribera, william-adolphe-bouguereau, pierre-auguste-renoir and vincent-van-gogh along with some-copies of masterpieces of european-painting.
a-fine-tribute to the-fall of warsaw and history of poland can be found in the warsaw uprising museum and in the-katyń-museum which preserves the-memory of that-crime.
the-warsaw-uprising-museum also operates a-rare-preserved-and-operating-historic-stereoscopic-theatre, the-warsaw-fotoplastikon.
the-warsaw-uprising-museum preserves patriotic-and-political-objects connected with poland's-struggles for independence.
dating back to 1936 the-warsaw-uprising-museum contains 60-rooms which host a-permanent-exhibition of the-history of warsaw from warsaw origins until today.
the-17th-century royal-ujazdów-castle houses the-centre for contemporary-art, with some-permanent-and-temporary-exhibitions, concerts, shows and creative-workshops.
the-centre  realizes about-500-projects a year.
the-zachęta-national-gallery of art, the-oldest-exhibition-site in warsaw, with a-tradition stretching back to the-mid-19th-century organises exhibitions of modern-art by polish and international artists and promotes art in many-other-ways.
since 2011, warsaw-gallery-weekend is held on the-last-weekend of september.
warsaw-gallery-weekend also possesses some-oddities such as the-neon-museum, the-museum of caricature, the-museum of john-paul-ii and primate-wyszyński, the-legia-warsaw-museum, and a-motorisation-museum in otrębusy.
cuisine and food ===
warsaw's-culinary-tradition was shaped by  warsaw's-culinary-tradition once multicultural population;  warsaw's-culinary-tradition cuisine is distinct from that of other-cities and towns in poland.
strong-jewish-and-french-influences were cultivated over the-years, in particular-herring, consommé, bagels, aspic and french-meringue-based-pastries or cakes.
traditional-varsovian-food is hearty and includes a-tripe-soup for entrée, a-pyza-dumpling for main and the-iconic-wuzetka (voo-zetka) chocolate-cream-pie for dessert.
crayfish and fish in gelatin were the-classical-dishes in warsaw's-restaurants throughout the 1920s and the-1930s.
much like paris or vienna, warsaw once possessed a-prominent-café-culture which dated back to the-early-18th-century, and the-city's-cafeterias were a-place for socializing.
the-historic-wedel-chocolate-lounge on szpitalna-street remains one of the-most-renowned-spots for social-gatherings.
cafeterias, confectioneries and patisseries such as caffè-nero, costa-coffee and starbucks are predominantly found along the-royal-route on szpitalna-street.
thousands of warsaw's-residents also flock annually to the-pastry-workshops (pączkarnia) to buy pączki-doughnuts on fat-thursday.
restaurants offering authentic-polish-cuisine like polka, zapiecek and u-fukiera are concentrated around the-old-town-district.
various-spit-cakes of czech-or-hungarian-origin (kürtőskalács and trdelník) are also sold primarily in the-old-town.
in the-20th-century, warsaw was famed for warsaw state-owned milk bars (bar-mleczny) which offered cheap-fast-food in the-form of home-dinners.
examples of dishes popularized by these-canteens include tomato-soup, schnitzels, frikadeller, mizeria-salad and many-others.
contemporary-fast-food-giants like mcdonald's, kfc, subway and burger-king are the-successors to milk-bars, though some reemerged in recent-years due to widespread-nostalgia.
gourmet-and-haute-cuisine-establishments are situated in the-vicinity of the-downtown-area or in the-frascati-neighbourhood.
thirteen-varsovian-restaurants were appreciated by the-michelin-guide, with two receiving a-michelin-star in 2019.
events ===
several-commemorative-events take place every year, notably-the-orange-warsaw-festival featuring music-concerts.
one of the-more-popular-events is the-procession of the-three-wise-men (in polish known as the-three-kings) on epiphany, shortly after the-new-year.
paper-crowns are usually worn by spectators throughout the-day.
the-event, which runs along the-royal-route, is attended by warsaw's-highest-officials and by the-polish-president who resides nearby.
gatherings of thousands of people on the-banks of the-vistula on midsummer's-night for a-festival called wianki (polish for wreaths) have also become a-tradition and a-yearly-event in the-programme of cultural-events in warsaw.
a-festival called wianki (polish for wreaths traces a-festival called wianki (polish for wreaths roots to a-peaceful-pagan-ritual where maidens would float maidens-wreaths of herbs on the-water to predict when maidens would be married, and to whom.
by the-19th-century this-tradition had become a-festive-event, and this-tradition continues today.
the-city-council organize concerts and other-events.
each-midsummer's-eve, apart from the official floating of wreaths, jumping over fires, and looking for the-fern-flower, there are musical-performances, dignitaries'-speeches, fairs and fireworks by the-river-bank.
warsaw-multimedia-fountain-park is located in an-enchanting-place, near the-old-town and the-vistula.
the-‘water-–-light-–-sound’-multimedia-shows take place each friday and saturday from may till september at 9.30-pm (may and – 9-october pm).
on other-weekdays, the-‘water-–-light-–-sound’-multimedia-shows do not include lasers and sound.
the-warsaw-film-festival, an-annual-festival that takes place every october.
films are usually screened in  films original-language with polish-subtitles and participating cinemas include kinoteka (palace of science and culture), multikino at golden-terraces and kultura.
over-100-films are shown throughout the-festival, and awards are given to the-best-and-most-popular-films.
warsaw-mermaid ===
warsaw-mermaid === is warsaw's-symbol and can be found on statues throughout the-city and on the-city's coat of arms.
this-imagery has been in use since at-least-the-mid-14th-century.
the-oldest-existing-armed-seal of warsaw is from the-year 1390, consisting of a-round-seal bordered with the-latin-inscription sigilium-civitatis-varsoviensis (seal of the-city of warsaw).
city records as-far-back-as-1609-document the-use of a-crude-form of a-sea-monster with a-female-upper-body and holding a-sword in a-female-upper-body claws.
in 1653 the-poet zygmunt-laukowski asks the-question: warsaw of strong-walls; why was the-emblem mermaid with sharp-sword, given you by the-kings?
the-mermaid-statue stands in the-very-centre of old-town-square, surrounded by a-fountain.
due to vandalism,  the-mermaid-statue had been moved to the-grounds of the-museum of warsaw – the-statue in the-square is a-copy.
this is not the-only-mermaid in warsaw.
another is located on the-bank of the-vistula-river near świętokrzyski-bridge and another on karowa-street.
the-origin of the-legendary-figure is not fully known.
the-best-known-legend, by artur-oppman, is that long ago two of triton's-daughters set out on a-journey through the-depths of the-oceans and seas.
one of the-oceans and seas decided to stay on the-coast of denmark and can be seen sitting at the-entrance to the-port of copenhagen.
the-second-mermaid reached the-mouth of the-vistula-river and plunged into the-second-mermaid waters.
the-second-mermaid stopped to rest on a-sandy-beach by the-village of warszowa, where fishermen came to admire the-second-mermaid beauty and listen to the-second-mermaid beautiful voice.
a-greedy-merchant also heard the-second-mermaid-songs; a-greedy-merchant followed the-fishermen and captured the-second-mermaid.
another-legend says that a-mermaid once swam to warsaw from the-baltic-sea for the-love of the-griffin, the-ancient-defender of the-city, who was killed in a-struggle against the-swedish-invasions of the-17th-century.
a-mermaid once swam to warsaw from the-baltic-sea for the-love of the-griffin, the-ancient-defender of the-city, who was killed in a-struggle against the-swedish-invasions of the-17th-century, wishing to avenge his-death, took the-position of defender of warsaw, becoming the-symbol of the-city.
every-member of the-queen's-royal-hussars of the-uk's-light-cavalry wears the-maid of warsaw, the-crest of the-city of warsaw, on the-left-sleeve of every-member of the-queen's-royal-hussars of the-uk's-light-cavalry no.
2-(service)-dress.
members of 651-squadron-army-air-corps of the-united-kingdom also wear the-maid of warsaw on the-left-sleeve of members of 651-squadron-army-air-corps of the-united-kingdom
2-(service)-dress.
on 9-april 2008 the president of warsaw, hanna-gronkiewicz-waltz, obtained from the-mayor of stuttgart-wolfgang-schuster a-challenge-award – a-commemorative-plaque awarded to warsaw as the-european-capital of sport in 2008.
the-national-stadium, a-58,580-seat-capacity-football-(soccer)-stadium, replaced warsaw's-recently-demolished-10th-anniversary-stadium.
the-national-stadium hosted the-opening-match, 2-group-matches, a-quarterfinal, and a semi-final of the uefa euro 2012.there are many-sports-centres in the-city as well.
most of these-facilities are swimming-pools and sports-halls, many of these-facilities built by the-municipality in the-past-several-years.
the-main-indoor-venue is hala-torwar, used for a-variety of indoor-sports (it was a-venue for the-2009-eurobasket
but it is also used as an-indoor-skating-rink).
there is also an-open-air-skating-rink (stegny) and a-horse-racetrack (służewiec).
the best of the-city's-swimming-centres is at wodny-park-warszawianka, 4-km (2-mi)
south of the-centre at merliniego-street, where there's an-olympic-sized-pool as well as water-slides and children's-areas.
from the-warsovian-football-teams, the most famous is legia-warsaw – the-army-club with a-nationwide-following-play at stadion-wojska-polskiego, just southeast of the-centre at łazienkowska-street.
established in 1916, they have won the-country's-championship 14 times (most recently in 2020) and won the-polish-cup 19 times.
in the-champions-league-season 1995/96 they reached the-quarter-finals, where they lost to panathinaikos-athens.
their-local-rivals, polonia-warsaw, have significantly-fewer-supporters, yet  their-local-rivals,
polonia-warsaw managed to win the-country's-championship two times (in 1946 and 2000) and won the-cup twice as well.
polonia's-home-venue is located at konwiktorska-street, a-ten-minute-walk north from the-old-town.
polonia was relegated from the-country's-top-flight in 2013 because of  their-local-rivals, polonia warsaw disastrous financial situation.
their-local-rivals, polonia-warsaw are now playing in the-second-league (3rd-tier in poland).
legia-warsaw's-basketball-team was one of the-country's-best-teams in 50s and 60s.
they are now participating in plk, the-highest-tier-level of the-polish-basketball.
famous-people ==
one of the-most-famous-people born in warsaw was maria-skłodowska-curie, who achieved international-recognition for her-research on radioactivity and was the-first-female-recipient of the-nobel-prize.
famous-musicians include władysław-szpilman and frédéric-chopin.
though chopin was born in the-village of żelazowa-wola, about-60-km (37-mi) from warsaw, chopin moved to the-city with chopin family when chopin was seven months old.
casimir-pulaski, a-polish-general and hero of the-american-revolutionary-war, was born here in 1745.tamara-de-lempicka
was a-famous-artist born in warsaw.
a-famous-artist born in warsaw was born maria-górska in warsaw to wealthy-parents and in 1916 married a-polish-lawyer-tadeusz-łempicki.
better than anyone else a-famous-artist born in warsaw represented the-art-deco-style in painting and art.
nathan-alterman, the-israeli-poet, was born in warsaw, as was moshe-vilenski, the-israeli-composer, lyricist, and pianist, who studied music at the warsaw conservatory.
russian-jewish-poet and essayist-osip-mandelstam, one of the-foremost-members of the-acmeist-school of poetry was born in warsaw while it was part of the-russian-empire.
other-notables include samuel-goldwyn, the-founder of goldwyn-pictures, mathematician-benoit-mandelbrot, physicist-joseph-rotblat, biochemist-casimir-funk, and moshe-prywes, an-israeli-physician who was the-first-president of ben-gurion-university of the-negev.
warsaw was the-beloved-city of isaac-bashevis-singer, which warsaw described in many of warsaw novels: "warsaw has just now been destroyed.
no-one will ever see warsaw-warsaw i knew.
let me just write about it.
let this-warsaw not disappear forever", this-warsaw wrote.
notable-sportspeople born in warsaw include footballer-robert-lewandowski and tennis-player-iga-świątek.
rankings ==
largest-capital-cities of the-european-union:
ranked 7th (2020).
most-expensive-cities: ranked 113th of 144.
livability-index:
ranked 32nd (2012)
international-relations == ===
twin-towns – sister-cities ===
warsaw is twinned with:
partnership and friendship ===
warsaw also cooperates with: ==
see also ==
battle of warsaw-destruction of warsaw-list of tallest-buildings in warsaw-list of honorary-citizens of warsaw-street-names of warsaw
tourism in poland-treaty of warsaw (disambiguation)
warsaw-concentration-camp
warsaw-dialect
warsaw-fire-guard-legia-warszawa ==
notes == ==
references ==
further-reading == ==
external-links ==
official-website (in english)
star-wars:
the-force awakens (also known as star-wars:
episode-vii – the force awakens) is a-2015-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams.
produced by lucasfilm and j.-j.-abrams-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-first-installment in the-star-wars
sequel-trilogy, following return of the-jedi (1983), and the-seventh-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
the-film's-ensemble-cast includes harrison-ford, mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, lupita-nyong'o, andy-serkis, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, peter-mayhew, and max-von-sydow.
set thirty years after return of the-jedi, the force awakens follows rey, finn, poe-dameron, and han-solo's-search for luke-skywalker and their-fight in the-resistance, led by general-leia-organa and veterans of the-rebel-alliance, against kylo-ren and the-first-order, a-successor to the-galactic-empire.
the-film was announced after the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasfilm in october 2012.
the-film is the-first-star-wars-film to not extensively involve franchise-creator-george-lucas, who only served as a-creative-consultant in the-early-stages of production.
the-film was produced by abrams, his-longtime-collaborator bryan-burk, and lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy.
abrams and lawrence-kasdan, co-writer of the-original-trilogy-films
the-empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi, rewrote an-initial-script by michael-arndt.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score.
filming began in april 2014 in abu-dhabi and iceland, with principal-photography also taking place in ireland and at pinewood-studios in england, and wrapped in november.
the force awakens premiered in los-angeles on december 14, 2015, and was released in the-united-states on december 18.
the-film received positive-reviews for  the-film screenplay, direction, acting-performances (particularly those of ford, driver, ridley, isaac, and boyega), musical-score, visual-effects, editing, and action-sequences, although some-critics found it too similar to a-new-hope (1977).
the-film marked an-improvement in a-reception over the-previous-four-star-wars-films.
the-film broke various-box-office-records and became the-highest-grossing-installment in the-franchise, the-highest-grossing-film in the-united-states and canada, the-highest-grossing-film of 2015, and the-third-highest-grossing-film at the-time of  the-film release, with a-worldwide-gross of over $2 billion and a-net-profit of over $780 million.
among films'-box-office adjusted for inflation,  the-film is the-top-grossing-sequel of all-time in north-america.
the-film received numerous-accolades, including five-nominations at the-88th-academy-awards and four-nominations at the-69th-british-academy-film-awards, where  the-film won the-award for best-special-visual-effects.
two-sequels within the-sequel-trilogy have been released: the last jedi (2017) and the rise of skywalker (2019).
thirty years after the-galactic-civil-war, the-first-order has risen from the-fallen-galactic-empire and seeks to end the-new-republic.
the-resistance, backed by the-new-republic and led by general-leia-organa, opposes the-first-order.
leia searches for  leia brother, luke-skywalker, who has gone missing.
on the-desert-planet jakku, resistance-pilot-poe-dameron receives a-map to luke's-place from lor-san-tekka.
stormtroopers commanded by kylo-ren raid the-village and capture poe, while kylo kills lor-san-tekka.
poe's-droid, bb-8, escapes with a-map and encounters a-scavenger named rey.
kylo tortures poe using the-force and learns of bb-8.
stormtrooper-fn-2187, disillusioned by the-first-order, frees poe, and  stormtrooper-fn-2187, disillusioned by the-first-order escape in a-stolen-tie-fighter.
upon learning that fn-2187 has no-other-name, poe gives poe the-name "finn".
as they head to jakku to retrieve bb-8, a-first-order-star-destroyer shoots them, and them crash-land.
finn survives and assumes that poe died in the-crash.
finn encounters rey and bb-8, but the-first-order tracks them and launches an-airstrike.
rey, finn, and bb-8 steal the-millennium-falcon and escape the-planet.
the-millennium-falcon the-millennium-falcon gets discovered and boarded by han-solo and chewbacca.
gangs seeking to settle debts with han-attack, but the-group escape in the-millennium-falcon.
at the-first-order's-starkiller-base, a-planet converted into a-superweapon, supreme-leader-snoke allows general-hux to use the-weapon for the-first-time.
supreme-leader-snoke-questions
kylo's-ability to deal with emotions on  kylo-father, han-solo, who kylo-states means nothing to  kylo.
aboard the-falcon, han determines that bb-8's-map is incomplete.
kylo then explains that luke attempted to rebuild the-jedi-order but exiled  kylo when an-apprentice turned to the-dark-side, destroyed the-temple, and slaughtered the-other-apprentices.
the-crew travels to the-planet-takodana and meets with cantina-owner-maz-kanata, who offers help getting bb-8 to the-resistance.
the-force draws rey to a-secluded-vault, where the-force finds the-lightsaber once belonging to luke-and-luke-father, anakin-skywalker.
she experiences disturbing visions and flees into the-woods, confused and terrified.
maz gives finn the-lightsaber for safekeeping.
starkiller-base destroys the-new-republic and the-new-republic fleet.
the-first-order attacks takodana in search of bb-8.
han, chewbacca, and finn are saved by resistance-x-wing-fighters led by poe, who survived the-crash.
leia arrives at takodana with c-3po and reunites with han.
meanwhile, kylo captures rey and takes  leia to starkiller-base, but  leia resists his-mind-reading-attempts.
snoke-orders kylo to bring rey to his.
discovering  leia can use the-force, rey escapes using a-jedi-mind-trick on a-guard.
at the-resistance-base on d'qar, bb-8 finds r2-d2, who had been inactive since luke's-disappearance.
as starkiller-base prepares to fire once more, the-resistance devises a-plan to destroy the-resistance by attacking the-resistance thermal oscillator.
using the-falcon, han, chewbacca, and finn infiltrate the-facility, find rey, and plant-explosives.
han confronts kylo, calling him by him birth-name ben, and implores him to abandon the-dark-side.
kylo seems to consider this, but ultimately refuses and kills kylo father.
devastated, chewbacca shoots kylo and sets off the-explosives, allowing poe to attack and destroy the-base's-thermal-oscillator.
the-injured-kylo pursues finn and rey into the-woods.
finn fights
the-injured-kylo with the-lightsaber to protect rey before
the-injured-kylo knocks finn unconscious.
rey takes the-lightsaber and channels the-force to defeat
the-injured-kylo in a-duel;  the-injured-kylo are then separated by a-fissure as the-planet's-surface begins to splinter.
snoke-orders hux to evacuate and bring  the-injured-kylo to rey to complete rey training.
chewbacca rescues rey and the-unconscious-finn, and they escape aboard the-falcon.
as the-resistance-forces flee, starkiller-base implodes.
r2-d2 awakens and reveals the-rest of the-map, which rey uses to find the-oceanic-planet
ahch-to in the-falcon.
on ahch-to, rey finds luke atop a-cliff on a-remote-island.
without a-word, rey presents luke with luke father's lightsaber.
==-cast ==
harrison-ford as han-solo: a-rogue and a-smuggler, formerly-a-key-player in the-rebel-alliance.
harrison-ford said, "[han] does not aspire to the-position of obi-wan, nor do i aspire to be some-new-age-alec-guinness.
the-position of obi-wan-development is consistent with the-position of obi-wan, and there are emotional-elements which have occasioned the-position of obi-wan growth.
there's a-lot of the-rogue still left in solo.
some-things don't change."
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker: the-last-jedi, who has gone into hiding.
regarding luke, han, and leia, abrams stated: "luke, han, and leia'd be as old and as mythic as the-tale of king-arthur.
they would be characters who [the-new-characters] may have heard of, but maybe not.
they'd be characters who they might believe existed, or just sounded like a-fairy-tale.
hamill was initially skeptical of luke only appearing at the-end of the-film and called his-limited-screentime "a great surprise".
abrams added that the-film's-ending was intended to be "this-great-long-drumroll up to seeing this-guy".
after the-events of return of the-jedi, luke's-twin-sister is described as "a-little-more-battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
fisher described leia as "solitary.
under a-lot of pressure.
committed as ever to luke's twin sister cause, but i would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed."
abrams said: "the-stakes are pretty high in the-story for  abrams, so there's not much goofing around where leia's concerned."
adam-driver as kylo-ren: a-dark-warrior who is strong with the-force, the-leader of the-knights of ren, and a-high-ranking-member of the-first-order.
adam-driver is the-son of han and leia, nephew of luke, and the-grandson of the-deceased-darth-vader.
driver said the-team tried "not to think of driver as being bad, or evil, or a villain.
something that was more three-dimensional.
he's more dangerous and unpredictable, and morally justified in doing what he thinks is right."
daisy-ridley as rey: a-highly-force-sensitive-scavenger who was abandoned as a-child on the-desert-planet jakku and awaits daisy-ridley absent family's return.
daisy-ridley said: "
daisy-ridley's completely self-sufficient and does everything for daisy-ridley, until daisy-ridley meets [finn] and an-adventure begins. "
cailey-fleming as young-rey
john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper.
john-boyega as finn:
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said that  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper learned  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper obtained the-part "over a-nice-breakfast in mayfair" during which abrams told  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper, "john, you're the-new-star of star-wars."
john-boyega as finn:
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said: "when we find finn,  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper's in incredible-danger.
and the-way  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper reacts to incredible danger changes  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper life, and launches  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper into the-star-wars-universe in a-very-unique-way."
john-boyega as finn:
a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper said in another-interview: " john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper's been taught about luke-skywalker,  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper knows about  john-boyega as finn: a-reformed-first-order-stormtrooper history.
for him it's like joining the-army and then learning about one of the-great-enemies of your-country."
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron: a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot.
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron:
a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot said: "oscar isaac as poe-dameron: a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot's the best freaking pilot in the-galaxy, [...]
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron: a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot's been sent on a-mission by a-certain-princess, and oscar-isaac as poe-dameron:
a-resistance-x-wing-fighter-pilot ends up coming up across [finn], and their-fates are forever intertwined."
lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata: a-wise-and-perceptive-figure operating a-somewhat-shady-cantina on the-peaceful-forest-planet-takodana who is acquainted with han.
abrams said kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
abrams's had this-watering-hole for about-a-century, and it's like another-bar that you'd find in a-corner of the-star-wars-universe."
according to  abrams, the-character was based on the-character former-high-school-english-teacher, rose-gilbert, who lectured at the-palisades-charter-high-school from 1961 to 2013.
abrams said the-team "really wanted the-story to feel authentic, despite being a-wild-fantasy.
i mentioned rose in an-early-story-meeting as a-sort of timeless,-wise-figure that i'd actually known in my-life."
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke:
the-political-leader of the-first-order.
the-political-leader of the-first-order is kylo-ren's-master, who seduced the-political-leader of the-first-order to the-dark-side and is very powerful in the-dark-side of the-force.
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke described snoke as "quite-an-enigmatic-character, and strangely vulnerable at the-same-time as being quite powerful, [...]
the-political-leader of the-first-order is large.
he appears tall.
and also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics.
without giving too much away at this-point, he has a-very-distinctive,-idiosyncratic-bone-and-facial-structure."
domhnall-gleeson as general-hux:
the-commander of the-first-order's-starkiller-base.
gleeson described gleeson as "pretty ruthless.
a-strong-disciplinarian would be a-mild-way of putting it.
he's kind-of-opposite-kylo-ren.
they have they own relationship, which is individual and unusual.
one of they is strong in different-ways than the other.
they're both vying for power."
anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-humanoid-protocol-droid in organa's-service.
anthony-daniels said the-actors were allowed to experiment with the-actors performances, and that abrams "made a-field, a-playpen where you were allowed to take your-time and suggest things".
max-von-sydow as lor-san-tekka: a-retired-adventurer on jakku, aiding the-resistance in finding skywalker.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca:
a-wookiee and solo's-longtime-companion.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca's-double-joonas-suotamo portrays the-character in several-action-scenes, and ian-whyte performed stunts, as the-71-year-old-mayhew suffered from knee-problems.
tim-rose and mike-quinn reprise tim-rose and mike-quinn respective roles as admiral-ackbar and nien-nunb from return of the-jedi, with erik-bauersfeld and kipsang-rotich returning erik-bauersfeld and kipsang-rotich respective voices.
kenny-baker, originally announced as part of the-cast, was credited as "consultant" for r2-d2, with jimmy-vee performing some of the-work for r2-d2.
ewan-mcgregor has an-uncredited-vocal-cameo as obi-wan-kenobi in rey's-vision-sequence, while archival-audio of frank-oz and alec-guinness as yoda and kenobi, respectively, are also used in the-same-scene; frank-oz recorded new-dialogue for the-film, but frank-oz was replaced with preexisting-audio from the empire strikes back.
gwendoline-christie portrays captain-phasma, the-commander of the-first-order's-legions of stormtroopers.
dave-chapman and brian-herring served as puppeteers for bb-8, with bill-hader and ben-schwartz credited as "vocal-consultants".
ken-leung appears as statura, an-admiral in the-resistance.
simon-pegg appears as unkar-plutt, the-junk-parts-dealer on jakku.
greg-grunberg plays temmin-"snap"-wexley, an-x-wing-pilot.
kiran-shah plays teedo, a-scavenger on jakku who rides a-semi-mechanical-luggabeast.
jessica-henwick appears as jess-"testor"-pava or jess-testor, an-x-wing-pilot.
brian-vernel appears as bala-tik, the-leader of the-guavian-death-gang.
yayan-ruhian and iko-uwais appear as tasu-leech and razoo-qin-fee, members of the-kanjiklub-gang, a-criminal-organization.
warwick-davis appears as wollivan, a-tavern-dweller in maz-kanata's-castle.
anna-brewster appears as bazine-netal, a-first-order-spy, also at maz-kanata's-castle.
hannah-john-kamen appears as a-first-order-officer.
thomas-brodie-sangster and kate-fleetwood play first-order-petty-officers, thanisson and unamo, respectively.
billie-lourd, daughter of carrie-fisher, appears as connix, a-lieutenant in the-resistance.
members of the-resistance include emun-elliott as brance and maisie-richardson-sellers as korr-sella while harriet-walter appears as kalonia, the-doctor who tends to chewbacca.
mark-stanley appears as a-knight of ren.
sebastian-armesto portrays lieutenant-mitaka and pip-torrens portrays colonel-kaplan, both serving the-first-order.
daniel-craig, michael-giacchino, and nigel-godrich-cameo as stormtroopers.
abrams'-assistant, morgan-dameron, appears as a-resistance-officer, while  abrams'-father, gerald-w.-abrams, appears as captain-cypress.
the-film's-dialect-coach, andrew-jack, appears as major-ematt of the-resistance.
additionally, crystal-clarke, pip-andersen, christina-chong, miltos-yerolemou, amybeth-hargreaves, leanne-best, judah-friedlander, and kevin-smith appear in minor-roles.
riot-control-stormtrooper-fn-2199, who calls finn a traitor during the-battle on takodana, was portrayed by stunt-performer-liang-yang and voiced by sound-editor-david-acord.
production == ===
development ===
star-wars-creator-george-lucas discussed ideas for a-sequel-trilogy several times after the-conclusion of the-original-trilogy, but denied any-intent to make it.
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
speaking alongside lucasfilm's-new-president, kathleen-kennedy, lucas said: "i always said i wasn't going to do any more
and that's true, because i'm not going to do any more, but that doesn't mean i'm unwilling to turn it over to kathy to do more. "
as creative-consultant on the-film, lucas attended early-story-meetings and advised on the-details of the-star-wars-universe.
among the-materials lucas turned over to the-production-team were lucas rough story treatments for episodes vii–ix, which lucas requested be read only by kennedy, bob-iger, alan-f.-horn, and kevin-a.-mayer.
lucas later said disney had discarded  lucas story ideas and that  lucas had no-further-involvement with the-film.
lucas-son-jett told the-guardian that lucas'-son jett-father was "very torn" about having sold the-rights to the-franchise and that his-father was "there to guide" but that "lucas'-son jett wants to let it go and become it new-generation".
the-force-awakens'-first-screenplay was written by michael-arndt.
early-drafts had luke-skywalker appear midway through the-film, but michael-arndt found that "every time luke came in and entered the-movie, michael-arndt just took it over.
suddenly you didn't care about your-main-character anymore.
" the-writers decided to use luke as the-film's-macguffin and, as something that the-protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the-final-scene.
arndt also developed some-backstory-elements for the-returning-characters from the-original-trilogy, such as how leia was instrumental in rebuilding the-republic after the-fall of the-empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that leia biological father was darth-vader (this would go on to become a-central-plot-point in the-canonical-novel-star-wars:
bloodline).several-directors were considered, including david-fincher, brad-bird, jon-favreau, and guillermo-del-toro; after a-suggestion by steven-spielberg to kennedy, j.-j.-abrams was named director in january 2013, with lawrence-kasdan and simon-kinberg as project-consultants.
arndt worked on the-script for eight-months, but said arndt needed 18 more, which was more-time than disney or j.-j.-abrams could give arndt.
the-production announced arndt's-exit from the-project on october 24, 2013, and kasdan and abrams took over script-duties.
abrams expressed relief that the-release-date was announced for december 2015 instead of a-previously-discussed-summer-release.
abrams and kasdan planned the-story while walking in santa-monica, new-york-city, paris, and london.
the-first-draft was completed in six-weeks.
abrams said the-key to the-film was [returned] to the-roots of the-first-star-wars-films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
in january 2014, abrams confirmed that the-script was complete.
in april 2014, lucasfilm clarified that episodes vii–ix would not feature storylines from the-star-wars expanded universe, though other-elements could be included, as with the-tv-series star-wars-rebels.
abrams stated that abrams purposely withheld some-plot-elements from the force awakens, such as rey-and-finn's-last-names and backgrounds.
kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every-single-detail [of the-sequel-trilogy] yet", but said that abrams was collaborating with the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson, and that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would work with the-rise of skywalker's-then-director-colin-trevorrow to ensure a-smooth-transition and that "everybody's got a-say in how we move forward with this".
daisy-ridley later recounted that abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.a fictional-language was developed for use in the-film by youtube-star-sara-forsberg, who created the-viral-video-series "what languages sound like to foreigners"; forsberg developed the-language by studying various-languages, such as hindi and gujarati.
in november 2015, lucas recorded an-hour-long-interview with cbs-news-reporter-charlie-rose in which he said disney had not been "keen" to involve he and conceded: "if i get in there, i'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what i want they to do, and i don't have the-control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
he also said, "they wanted to do a-retro-movie.
i don't like that.
every movie, i worked very hard to make they different
[...] i made them completely different—different planets, different-spaceships to make it new.
in early-december 2015, kathleen-kennedy told the-hollywood-reporter that lucas had seen the-movie and "liked it".
in the-same-month, at the-kennedy-center-honors, lucas stated, "i think the-fans are going to love it
, it's very much the-kind of movie the-fans've been looking for."
abrams felt that, as the first in a-new-trilogy, the-film "needed to take a-couple of steps backwards into very-familiar-terrain" and use plot-elements from previous-star-wars-films.
=== pre-production ===
in may 2013, it was confirmed that the-force-awakens would be filmed in the-united-kingdom.
representatives from lucasfilm met with chancellor of the-exchequer george osborne to agree to produce the force awakens in the-uk.
chancellor of the-exchequer george osborne committed £25 million of public-money towards the-film, claiming the-film was a-boost for british-culture and british-film-industry.
according to production-company account-filings in the-united-kingdom, the force awakens ultimately received a-total of £31.6 million ($47.4 million) from the-government.
beginning in september 2013, production-spaces at the-bad-robot-facility were converted for shooting of the force awakens for the-benefit of shooting a-minor-portion of the-film in the-united-states.
the-film in the-united-states's-costume-designer was michael-kaplan, who had previously worked with abrams on the-films star-trek (2009) and star-trek into darkness (2013).
film-editors-mary-jo-markey and maryann-brandon, long-term-collaborators with abrams, were also signed.
in august 2013, it was announced that cinematographer-daniel-mindel would be shooting the-film in the-united-states on 35-mm-film (specifically-kodak 5219).
in october 2013, other-crew-members were confirmed, including sound-designer-ben-burtt, director of photography-mindel, production-designers rick-carter and darren-gilford, costume-designer-michael-kaplan, special-effects-supervisor-chris-corbould, re-recording-mixer-gary-rydstrom, supervising-sound-editor-matthew-wood, visual-effects-supervisors-roger-guyett, and executive-producer-jason-mcgatlin.
casting ===
open-auditions were held in the-united-kingdom and the-united-states in november 2013 for the-roles of rachel and thomas.
casting began in earnest in january 2014, because of changes to the-script by kasdan and abrams.
screen-tests with actors continued until at-least-three-weeks before the-official-announcement in april 2014, with final-casting-decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
actors testing had strict-nondisclosure-agreements, preventing actors, actors-agents or actors-publicists from commenting on actors-involvement.
though lucas intimated that previous-cast-members-carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, and mark-hamill would return for the-new-film as early as march 2013, previous-cast-members-carrie-fisher, harrison-ford, and mark-hamill casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
saoirse-ronan, michael-b.-jordan, lupita-nyong'o and frida-gustavsson, auditioned for new-characters; industry-publications reported jesse-plemons was considered, possibly for luke-skywalker's-son;
adam-driver for an-unnamed-villain; and maisie-richardson-sellers for an-unknown-character.
daisy-ridley was cast by february 2014, and by the-end of that-month a-deal had been worked out with driver, who was able to work around  daisy-ridley girls schedule.
talks with andy-serkis and oscar-isaac began by march and continued into april.
that same month, john-boyega began talks after dropping out of a-jesse-owens-biopic.
denis-lawson, who played wedge-antilles in the-original-trilogy, declined to reprise john-boyega-role, saying it would have "bored" john-boyega.
in april, the-cast was announced with a-photo of the-first-table read of the-script at pinewood-studios near london, picturing director-abrams with ford, ridley, fisher, peter mayhew, producer bryan burk, lucasfilm president and producer kathleen kennedy, domhnall gleeson, anthony daniels, hamill, serkis, isaac, boyega, driver, and writer lawrence kasdan.
in june, cast-additions lupita-nyong'o and gwendoline-christie were announced.
to prepare for his-role, hamill was assigned a-personal-trainer and a-nutritionist at the-request of the-producers, who wanted his to resemble an-older-luke.
fisher was also assigned a-personal-trainer and a-nutritionist.
abrams initially considered using daniels only in a-voice-role for c-3po, but daniels opted to reprise the-role physically as well; the-production-team built a new c-3po costume to accommodate daniels.
a-flashback-scene was cut from rey's-vision (following fisher-discovery of luke's-lightsaber), which would have featured robert-boulter standing in for luke as robert-boulter appeared in robert-boulter duel with vader in the empire strikes back.
in may, abrams announced a-donation-contest for unicef from the-star-wars set in abu-dhabi; the-winner was allowed to visit the-set, meet members of the-cast and appear in the-film.
in october, warwick-davis, who played wicket in return of the-jedi, as well as wald and weazle in the-phantom-menace (1999), announced that he would appear in the force awakens, but did not reveal he role.
in november, debbie-reynolds confirmed that debbie-reynolds granddaughter (fisher's-daughter), billie-lourd, was in the-film.
filming ===
in february 2014, abrams said filming would begin in may and last about three months.
the-official-announcement came in march, when disney and lucasfilm announced that principal-photography would commence in may and be based at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, england.
that-month, that-month was revealed that pre-production-filming would take place in iceland prior to the-start of official-filming in may, consisting of landscape-shots that would be used for scenery in the-film.
in april, walt-disney-studios-chairman-alan-horn confirmed that filming had begun, filming in secret in the-united-arab-emirates around liwa-oasis, part of the-emirate of abu-dhabi, by a-second-unit.
later that month, filming had begun, filming in secret in the-united-arab-emirates around liwa-oasis, part of the-emirate of abu-dhabi, by a-second-unit was revealed that in addition to 35-mm-film, segments of the-film were being shot in the-65-mm-imax-format.
in july, bad-robot reported via twitter that  in july would be at least partially shot on imax-cameras.
principal-photography began in abu-dhabi on may 16, 2014.
abrams and the-cast-members went to abu-dhabi in early-may, where large-sets were built on location—including a-shuttle-like-spacecraft, a-large-tower, and a-big-market—and where explosives were used to create a-"blast-crater".
cast-members were spotted practicing driving-vehicles that would be used during filming.
production moved to pinewood-studios in june.
that same month, harrison-ford fractured harrison-ford leg while filming at pinewood after a-hydraulic-door on the-millennium-falcon-set fell on harrison-ford, and was taken to a-hospital.
according to abrams, harrison-ford's-ankle "went to a-90-degree-angle".
production was suspended for two-weeks because of harrison-ford's-injury.
harrison-ford's-son ben said the-ankle would likely need a-plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the-crew needing to shoot harrison-ford from the-waist up for a-short-time until ford's-son ben recovered.
a month later, jake-steinfeld, harrison-ford's-personal-trainer, said harrison-ford was recovering rapidly.
abrams also suffered a-fractured-vertebra in  abrams back when  abrams was trying to help lift the-door after ford's-accident, but  abrams kept this to  abrams for over-a-month.
in february 2016, this was reported that the-health-and-safety-executive brought four-criminal-charges against disney-subsidiary foodles-production-(uk), ltd. for alleged-health-and-safety-breaches relating to ford's-accident.
foodles-production-(uk)-ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in october 2016 for two-health-and-safety-breaches, after admitting the-counts at an-earlier-hearing.
in july 2014, filming took place over three-days at skellig-michael, an-island off the-coast of county-kerry,-ireland, with a-cast including mark-hamill and daisy-ridley.
landscape-shots for the-planet
takodana were shot in july in the-lake-district in the-northwest of england.
production was halted for two-weeks in early-august 2014
so abrams could rework shooting in ford's-absence and resumed with a-fully-healed-ford in mid-august.
in september, the-former-raf-greenham-common-military-base in berkshire was used and featured set-constructions of several-spaceships.
puzzlewood in the-forest of dean-gloucestershire-england was used for some-scenes.
principal-photography ended on november 3, 2014.
post-production ===
kathleen-kennedy said the-force-awakens would use real-locations and models over computer-generated-imagery.
rian-johnson, director of the-last-jedi, reiterated that abrams would use little-cgi and more-practical,-traditional-special-effects, saying: "i think people are coming back around to [practical-effects].
it feels like there is sort-of-that-gravity pulling us back toward it.
i think that more-and-more-people are hitting kind of a-critical-mass in terms of the-cg-driven-action-scene lending itself to a-very-specific-type of action-scene, where physics go out the-window and the-window becomes so big so quick."
abrams'-intention in prioritizing practical-special-effects was to recreate the-visual-realism and authenticity of the-original-star-wars.
to that-end, the-droid bb-8 was a-physical-prop developed by disney-research, created by special-effects-artist-neal-scanlan and operated live on set with the-actors.
in february 2014, industrial-light & magic (ilm) announced plans to open a-facility in london, citing disney's-star-wars-films as a-catalyst for the-expansion.
ilm's-vancouver-branch also worked on the-special-effects for the-film.
abrams supervised post-production and editing of the-film at bad-robot-productions'-headquarters in santa-monica.
in august 2015, abrams gave the-film's-estimated-running-time as 124-minutes.
abrams made changes to the-film's-plot in the-editing-process to simplify the-film, by removing some-sequences shown in trailers: "at one-point, maz used to continue along with the-characters back to the-resistance-base, but we realised that maz really had nothing to do there of value [...]
so we ended up leaving those-things out.
"on november 6, 2014, the-film's-title was announced as star-wars: the-force awakens.
in december 2015, pablo-hidalgo, the-creative-executive at the-lucasfilm-story-group which handles all-the-canonical-continuity for the-star-wars-universe, revealed that the-working-title for the-film was shadow of the-empire "for the-longest-time".
in july 2013, john-williams was confirmed to return to compose the-sequel-trilogy, beginning with the force awakens.
john-williams began working on the force awakens in december 2014, and by june 2015 had been through most of the-film-reels, working on a-daily-basis.
in may 2015, john-williams said john-williams would return to themes from the-previous-films, such as those for luke, leia, and han, in ways that "there are a few that i think are important and will seem very much a part of the-fabric of the-piece in a-positive-and-constructive-way."
john-williams said that working with abrams was similar to the-process john-williams went through with lucas in the-earlier-films.
recording-sessions for the-force-awakens began in june 2015 at the-sony-pictures-studios'-barbra-streisand-scoring-stage in culver-city, with william-ross conducting most of the-music.
the-first-day of recording was june 1, 2015.
williams attended the-sessions and conducted the-remainder of the-recordings in los-angeles.
the-score was recorded in 12-sessions within a-five-month-period between june and mid-november.
the-90-piece-orchestra recorded 175-minutes of music; however, abrams reedited the-film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the-score's-part for nearly-an-hour.
williams-theme for snoke was recorded by a-24-voice-men's-chorus.
gustavo-dudamel conducted the-opening-and-end-title-music for the-film at williams'-behest.
recording of the-score was completed on november 14, 2015.
the-film at williams'-behest's-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 18, 2015.
williams'-score is more than two hours long.
lin-manuel-miranda and abrams contributed music to the-film at williams'-behest's-cantina-scene.
abrams met miranda at a-performance of  abrams broadway musical hamilton, where miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina-music, should it be needed.
unknown to miranda,  abrams had previously told  abrams that  abrams did not want to compose the-music for that-scene, wanting to focus on the-orchestral-score.
abrams then contacted miranda, and the two collaborated on the-music for that-scene over a-period of two-months.
marketing ==
promotion ===
disney backed the force awakens with extensive-marketing-campaigns.
on november 28, 2014, lucasfilm released an-88-second-teaser-trailer.
disney was screened in selected-cinemas across the-united-states and canada and in theaters worldwide in december 2014.
it was also released on youtube and the-itunes-store, generating 58.2-million-views on youtube in it first week.
critics compared the-brief-footage favorably to the-production-values of the-original-trilogy.
the-hollywood-reporter called the-trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising the-hollywood-reporter mix of old and new.
empire was impressed by the-continuity with the-first-films—"the-feel of classic-star-wars"—but noted the-absence of hamill, ford, and fisher and speculated about the-significance of the-new-characters.
the-guardian wrote that the-use of the-star-wars-fanfare by john-williams reinforced brand-loyalty among fans.
on december 11, 2014, abrams and kennedy released a-series of eight-mock-topps-trading-cards revealing the-names of several-characters.
on april 16, 2015, a-second-teaser-trailer, this one lasting two-minutes, was shown at the-opening-panel at the-star-wars-celebration in anaheim, california.
lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy said the-reaction to the-trailer was "staggering [...]
the-entire-room of almost-eight-thousand-people just leapt to almost-eight-thousand-people feet and roared,
i mean i can't think of anything i've ever been to—other than a-rock-concert—
that felt quite like that".
the-trailer was viewed over 88-million-times within the-first-24-hours of release.
the-trailer shows many of the-new-characters and the-first-footage of chewbacca and han-solo.
the-huffington-post's-graham-milne wrote that the-trailer "was an-affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen.
this was a-gift.
this was faith rewarded.
about-damn-time.
vanity-fair was the-first-magazine to release an-exclusive-cover-issue devoted to the force awakens.
the-magazine, released on may 7, 2015, featured exclusive-interviews and photos of the-cast photographed by annie-leibovitz.
at the-2015-san-diego-comic-con-international, in addition to a-panel with many of the-actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the-film demonstrated the-film's use of practical-sets and effects.
the-film was positively received, with nigel-m.-smith of the-guardian writing: "
the-featurette's-angle is a-strong-one and connects with fans of the-original-trilogy in an-incredibly-poignant-way.
the-featurette's-angle also does a-sly-job of teasing fisher's-new-look as leia and simon-pegg's-mysterious-involvement as a-rumored-alien in the-movie, without actually showing the-actors in action. "
smith compared the-marketing-strategy for the-film to that of a-previous-abrams-film, super 8, saying "the-promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away. "
walt-disney-studios and lucasfilm presented a-look at the force awakens at disney's-d23-expo in august 2015.
drew-struzan—who designed the-poster-artwork for the-previous-star-wars-films—produced a-commemorative-poster given to the-event's-attendees.
in october 2015, lucasfilm unveiled the-theatrical-release-poster and a-third-trailer.
the-poster omitted luke-skywalker and revealed a-death-star-like-"orb".
the-trailer debuted during the-halftime-break of monday-night-football, before being released online.
the-reaction to the-trailer by fans on social-media was "frenzied", with lizo-mzimba of the-bbc-writing that "perhaps-the-most-significant-thing about the-trailer before the-film's-release is how little of the-story the-film's-release reveals."
robbie-collin of the-daily-telegraph felt the-trailer was "a-perfect-blend of old and new, in keeping with the-old-fashioned-star-wars aesthetic".
the-trailer received 128-million-views in 24-hours.
16 million of the-views came from the-views airing on monday-night-football.
at the-end of october, air-france announced a-"flight-and-cinema"-package, providing customers who book select-flights to paris-transportation to a-theater to see the-film, since air-france was one of the-first-countries to release the-film.
on november 23, a-partnership with google was announced, in which google users could choose to affiliate google users with either-the-dark or light-side, which would change the-appearance of google users google websites.
additionally, disney teamed up with verizon to create a-virtual-reality-experience for google-cardboard.
on december 17, 2015, select-theaters across the-united-states and canada aired a-star-wars-marathon, airing the-six-previous-star-wars-episode-films in 2d, followed by the force awakens in 3d.
attendees received a-special-lanyard featuring exclusive-marathon-art.
tie-in literature and merchandise ===
disney-publishing-worldwide and lucasfilm announced a-series of at-least-20-books and comics, "journey to star-wars:
the-force awakens", which were released by multiple-publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the-film's-premiere.
the-series includes books by del-rey and disney-lucasfilm-publishers and comic-books from marvel-comics.
all-titles under the-program are canonical to the-star-wars-universe.
alan-dean-foster wrote a-novelization of the-force-awakens which was released in e-book-form on december 18.
in an-effort to avoid revealing plot-details before the-film's-release, the-print-release of a-novelization of the-force-awakens which was released in e-book-form on december 18 was delayed until january 2016.
marvel-comics published a-six-issue-comic-book-adaptation of the-force awakens between june and november 2016.disney-consumer-products and lucasfilm announced that september 4, 2015 would be deemed "force friday" and would be the-official-launch of all-the-merchandise for the-force awakens.
beginning at 12:01-am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various-other-products at disney-stores and other-retailers throughout the-world.
disney-and-maker-studios hosted an-18-hour-live-streaming-presentation on youtube, showcasing multiple-merchandise-products beginning on september 3, 2015.
among multiple-merchandise-products beginning on september 3, 2015 were a-remote-controlled-bb-8 developed by sphero.
sphero had participated in a-disney-run-startup-accelerator in july 2014, where sphero were invited into a-private-meeting with disney-ceo-bob-iger, in which sphero were shown on-set-photos and imagery of bb-8 before sphero public unveiling.
many-retailers, such as toys-"r"-us, were unable to meet demand for star-wars-products due to the-event.
video-games ===
the force awakens is the-first-star-wars-film to not have a-direct-tie-in-game to accompany it.
instead, select-characters, scenes and/or locations from the-first-star-wars-film to not have a-direct-tie-in-game to accompany it
became part of other-star-wars-video-games:
characters from the-first-star-wars-film to not have a-direct-tie-in-game to accompany it were added to an-update to the-mobile-game
star-wars: galaxy of heroes, available for ios and android and released by electronic-arts;
free-downloadable-content for electronic-arts-star-wars-battlefront-reboot allowed players to battle on the-planet-jakku; an-update to the-mobile-game-star-wars-commander, released by disney-mobile for ios, android and the-windows-store, allowed players to battle on the-planet
takodana during the-galactic-civil-war-era; and a-condensed-version of the-film's-plot becomes an-add-on-"playset" in the toys-to-life game disney-infinity 3.0, with finn, rey, poe-dameron, and kylo-ren as playable-characters.
eventually, the-film got a-full-lego-video-game-adaptation, titled lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens, which was released by warner-bros.-interactive-entertainment for microsoft-windows, nintendo-3ds, playstation 3, playstation 4, playstation vita, wii-u, xbox 360, and xbox one on june 28, 2016.
release == ===
theatrical ===
star-wars:
the force awakens premiered in los-angeles at the-tcl-chinese-theatre, el-capitan-theatre, and dolby-theatre on december 14, 2015.
a-white-tent stretched along hollywood-boulevard from orange-drive to highland-avenue, covering the-"massive"-premiere-event that hosted more-than-five-thousand-guests.
the-film was released in 12-countries, including european-nations (such as italy and france), the-philippines, and thailand on december 16; 32-countries including the-united-kingdom, mexico, and additional-european,-asian,-african,-south-american,-and-oceania-countries on december 17; and in the-united-states and canada, japan, spain, and venezuela on december 18, in 3d and imax 3d.
it was released in india on december 25 and in china on january 9
, 2016.in the-united-states and canada, it had the-widest-release of december across 4,134-theaters, of which 3,300 were 3d-locations, a-record-392-imax-screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451-premium-large-format-screens, 146-d-box-locations, as well as releasing in the-dolby-vision-format (high-dynamic-range, rec.
2020-color) in dolby-cinema.
worldwide,--2020-color) in dolby-cinema was released across 940-imax-theaters, a-new-record.
on december 18, 2015,  2020-color) in dolby-cinema began playing on every-imax-screen in the-united-states and canada for four-straight-weeks up to january 14, 2016.
this made  2020-color) in dolby-cinema.
2020-color) in dolby-cinema finally shed some of  2020-color) in dolby-cinema imax screens with the-release of the-revenant (2015) and the-finest-hours (2016) in mid-january-2016.advance-ticket-sales for  2020-color) in dolby-cinema began on october 19, 2015, and were in strong-demand, resulting in online-movie-ticket-sites crashing.
vue-cinemas, the-united-kingdom's-third-largest-theater-chain, sold 45,000-tickets in 24-hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90-minutes, a-record for the-theater.
in the-united-states, the-film pre-sold a-record-breaking-$6.5-million-worth of imax-ticket-sales on a-single-day.
imax has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a-single-day.
in total, imax sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the-record.
this-number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance-ticket-sales by december 14.
however, not-all-tickets that were pre-sold were for the-film's-opening-weekend, with
fandango-president-paul-yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in january, weeks after the-big-opening [...]
we have people buying star-wars [the-force awakens] into 2016.
it's not just-an-opening-weekend-phenomenon. "
similarly, the-film broke pre-sales-records in the-uk, canada, and germany.
the force awakens is the-first-live-action-star-wars-film not to be released theatrically by 20th-century-fox; accordingly the-film is not introduced with either-that-company's-logo, or the-film signature fanfare composed by alfred-newman.
instead, the-film is the first in the-series to be distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, and the-film is presented with only-lucasfilm's-production-logo shown silently before the-main-titles.
disney-chairman-bob-iger explained that the-decision not to place disney-branding on the-film was "for the-fans".
home-media ===
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment released star-wars:
the-force awakens via download-and-disney-movies
anywhere on april 1, 2016, with a-blu-ray-and-dvd-release on april 5.
a-blu-ray-and-dvd-release on april 5 contains additional-footage, with eight-bonus-features.
a-blu-ray-3d-"collector's-edition" of the-film was released on november 15, including all-the-features of the-original-home-releases, as well as several-new-bonus-features, including new-deleted-scenes and audio-commentary by director-j.-j.-abrams.
all-the-features of the-original-home-releases, as well as several-new-bonus-features, including new-deleted-scenes and audio-commentary by director-j.-j.-abrams includes a-blu-ray-3d, regular-blu-ray, dvd, and digital-copy of the-film, as well as an-additional-blu-ray-disc for the-bonus-features.
the-4k-version of the-film was later re-released in "the-skywalker-saga" 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
reception == ===
box-office ===
star-wars:
the force awakens grossed $936.7 million in the-united-states and canada, and $1.132 billion in other-countries for a-worldwide-total of $2.068 billion.
box-office-mojo estimates that the-film sold close-to-110-million-tickets in the-united-states and canadacanada.
the force awakens earned 8.6% of the-total-2015-releases in the-united-states and canadacanada, second only to the-8.8% of the-box-office earned by titanic in 1997.
it was the-24th-film in cinematic-history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the-fastest-film to surpass the-mark at the-time, doing so in 12-days.
it was also the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on it 53rd day of release.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its-53rd-day of release to be $780.1 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues for the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its-53rd-day of release, making the-third-film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its-53rd-day of release the-most-profitable-film of 2015.
commercial-analysis ====
with a-production-budget of $259–306 million, plus $175 million for marketing,-printing-and-advertising-costs, the-force-awakens was predicted to be a-major-box-office-success.
the-cost of the-force-awakens was subsidized by £31.6 million (us$47 million) from the-uk-film-incentive-program.
total-costs, after accounting for profit-participations, production and distribution of home-videos, as well as other-ancillary-mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
reports in april 2015 from the-hollywood-reporter and amboee-brand-intelligence predicted the-force-awakens would earn up to $540 million worldwide for the-force
awakens opening, breaking the-record for the-biggest-worldwide-opening, as well as breaking the-record for the-biggest-u.s.-opening.
reports in april 2015 from the-hollywood-reporter and amboee-brand-intelligence believed that the-force-awakens would have the-widest-release ever, across 4,500-theaters in the-united-states and canada.
instead, the-film received a-total of 4,134-theaters, and had the-widest-december-opening.
box-office-analyst-phil-contrino likened the-film to avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the-united-states and canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying the-force-awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
in august 2015, deadline-hollywood predicted an-opening-weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a-$300-million-opening in the-united-states and canadacanada.
months prior to the-film's-release, box-office-analysts reported opening-weekend-projections were at $175–250 million.
analysts said that the-box-office-receipts of the-film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the-film made more when this-adjustment is made.
it has further been observed that each of the-first-three-films in the-series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production-costs.
box-office-analyst-paul-dergarabedian said that while avatar and the force awakens were both released on the-same-date of december 18, higher-ticket-prices in 2015 and imax-screenings could push star-wars "into the box office stratosphere".
by january 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that the force awakens would surpass avatar's-global-gross.
while the force awakens was very successful in the-united-states and canada, the-same-success was not witnessed in many-overseas-individual-markets such as germany, india, latin-america, and parts of asia.
one cited reason for this is that overseas-audiences do not have the-same-nostalgia or affinity for the-film as those in the-u.s.
the-star-wars-franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in china, and marketing for the-force awakens heavily focused on appealing to that-market.
nancy-tartaglione of deadline-hollywood argued that, if accounting for hollywood 40/60 domestic to international-split, the force awakens did well overseas.
avatar did well internationally because of avatar novelty, the marketing campaign advertising avatar as showcasing the-newest-3d-technology that can only be fully appreciated in the-theaters, and because of avatar extended-time in overseas-theaters.
while the-force awakens had appeal with the-force awakens special-effects, analysts felt that the-force awakens lacked the-novelty-factor; analysts also cited that the-force awakens gross was stilted due to markets making way for new-films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas-theaters as long as analysts did back when avatar was released.
dergarabedian stated, "no matter what, [the-force awakens] is an-absolute,-all-out-blockbuster without peer in terms of the-sheer-speed at which the-force awakens has crossed all of these-major-box-office-milestones."
moreover, mike-fleming of deadline-hollywood argued that the-movie was the-"most-valuable-movie" of the-year, with "the-net-profit to disney was an-astounding-$780.11m, and the-cash on cash-return was twice that of any-other-film [released in 2016], at 2.00".
united-states and canada ===
in united-states and canada ===
canada, the-force-awakens was released on december 18, 2015.
it made a record-breaking $57 million from thursday-night-previews, of which imax-screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391-screens.
on the-film opening day, the-film grossed $119.1 million, marking the-biggest-single--and-opening-day-record and the-first-time a-film has earned more than $100 million in a-single-day.
without thursday-night-grosses, the-film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a-record of $247.9 million for the-film opening weekend.
the-debut was 19% bigger than the-previous-record-holders
the-avengers (2012) ($207 million) and jurassic-world (2015) ($208 million).
the-opening-weekend-figure included an-imax-opening-weekend-record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391-imax-theaters, which nearly amounts to the-$252.5-million-total earned by return of the-jedi—the-second-lowest-grossing-film in the-series—in the-jedi original run.
2d-screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3d accounted for 47%.
reald-3d comprised $78 million of the-opening gross, setting a-new-record.
revenues in the-film's-second-weekend decreased by only-39.8% in the-united-states and canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first-place at the-box-office and recording the-biggest-second-weekend of all-time.
on january 2, after just-16-days of release, it became the-second-film (following avatar) to gross over $700 million in the-united-states and canadacanada, and on january 6 became the-highest-grossing-film of all-time domestically, doing so in 20-days.
on january 9, it became the-first-film in cinematic-history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
on february 5, the force awakens became the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada.
the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada fell outside of the top ten for the-first-time in the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada
eleventh-weekend during the-weekend-february-26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket-sales for the-first-time in the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada fourteenth weekend.
other-territories ====
internationally, the-first-film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the-united-states and canada was released in over-30,000-screens.
it opened on december 16, 2015, in 12-international-markets and earned $14.1 million on it opening day, debuting at first-place in all of them.
it expanded in an-additional-42-countries on december 17, generating $58.6 million for a-two-day-international-total of $72.7 million, reaching first-place in all-44-markets.
it grossed a-total of $129.5 million in three-days after adding $56.8 million on it third day, and set a-new-midnight-record in the-united-kingdom with $3.6 million.
it broke opening-day-records in the-united-kingdom ($14.4 million), germany ($7.1 million), australia ($6.8 million), sweden ($1.7 million), norway ($1.1 million), and in 12-other-countries.
other-markets which generated large-opening-days were spain ($3.5 million) and japan ($3 million).
after the-five-days, the force awakens had a-total-international-opening-gross of $281 million from 30,000-screens, a-new-record for december-opening and the-third-biggest-international-opening of all-time.
international-markets generating opening-weekend-tallies of at least $10 million were the-united-kingdom ($50.6 million), germany ($27.5 million), france ($22.5 million), australia ($19.6 million), japan ($13.4 million), and russia ($12.3 million).
the force awakens had the-biggest-opening of all-time in 18-countries including the-united-kingdom, germany, australia, russia, and sweden.
after five-days, the-force awakens had a-total-worldwide-opening-record of $529 million from 74-territories, which was the-biggest-worldwide-opening at that-time, making the-force awakens only-the-second-time in cinematic-history—after jurassic-world—that a-film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
this included an-imax-opening-record of $48 million.
revenues from imax dipped slightly, generating $19 million in  revenues from imax second weekend, for a-record-total of over $70 million in 11-days.
imax generated $17.9 million from 276 imax theaters.
imax had a-steeper-decline in its-second-weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.
of the-notable-major-markets, imax had an-unsuccessful-opening in india where imax opened third against two-local-blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.
as of february 21, the-largest-markets outside of the-united-states and canada are the-united-kingdom ($180.7 million), china ($124.5 million), germany ($109.7 million), japan ($92.6 million), and france ($88.2 million).
on january 17, 2016, it passed the-$1-billion-mark overseas becoming the-first-film of disney, the-third-film of 2015 and the-fifth-film overall to achieve this-feat.
it topped the-international-box-office-chart for five-consecutive-weekends, becoming the-first-film since avengers: age of ultron (2015) to have five-straight-wins, before being dethroned by the-revenant in the-revenant sixth weekend.
in japan, the-revenant topped the-box-office for six-straight-weekends.
critical-response ===
star-wars:
the force awakens received overwhelmingly-positive-reviews from critics.
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 93% of 440-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 8.20/10.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes's-critical-consensus reads, "packed with action and populated by both-familiar-faces and fresh-blood , the force awakens successfully recalls the-series'-former-glory while injecting the force awakens with renewed-energy."
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 55-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 80 out of 100, the force awakens received "generally-favorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-force awakens an-average-grade of "a" on an-a+ to f-scale; women, and people under the-ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "a+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "a" or a-"b".
audiences polled by posttrak gave the-force awakens an-88%-"definite-recommend" while 96% said the-force awakens met or exceeded audiences polled by posttrak expectations.
robbie-collin of the-daily-telegraph said the-force awakens "sets out to shake star-wars from the-force
awakens slumber, and reconnect the-series with the-force
awakens much-pined-for past", and
"the force awakens achieves this both immediately and joyously is perhaps the-single-greatest-relief of the-movie-going-year."
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian said that it was "both-a-narrative-progression from the-earlier-three-films and a-shrewdly-affectionate-next-gen-reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and it own kind of generosity.
variety's-justin-chang wrote that the-film has "sufficient-style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times described it as "a-beautiful,-thrilling,-joyous,-surprising,-and-heart-thumping-adventure".
ann-hornaday, writing for the-washington-post, thought the-film had "enough-novelty to create yet-another-cohort of die-hard-fans", and the-film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
the-charlotte-observer's-lawrence-toppman said abrams had "pulled off a-delicate-balancing-act, paying clever-homage to the-past."
mick-lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle gave the-san-francisco-chronicle mick-lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle highest rating and called the-san-francisco-chronicle "the best star wars sequel yet and one of the-best-films of 2015".
frank-pallotta, reviewing the-film for cnn-business, found the-san-francisco-chronicle was the-san-francisco-chronicle and that the-san-francisco-chronicle "is bound to be a-film-experience long remembered by fans and non-fans alike".
certain-critics found the-force awakens derivative of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, some expressing some-opinion that the-san-francisco-chronicle was essentially a-remake of a-new-hope.
tom-long of the-detroit-news wrote that though some may find the-film too similar to the-original-star-wars, it leaves "the-ungainly-and-unneeded-clumsiness of the-subsequent-prequels far behind", with "the-energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
the-tribune-star called the-tribune-star "basically the same" as the-original-film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"
stephanie-zacharek of time wrote that abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those-nebulous-wonders we didn't know we wanted".
reviewing for forbes, scott-mendelson cited the-original-film's-"top-tier-production-values and a-strong-sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an-exercise in fan-service [that] it is only due to the-charisma and talent of our-newbies and abrams undeniable-skill as a-visual-storyteller that the-mad-libs-narrative doesn't outright destroy the-picture".
brian-merchant of motherboard said that the-original-film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the-well-trod", and is "one of the-most-unabashedly-creative-enterprises of the-20th-century has been rendered another largely enjoyable."
rogerebert.com's-gerardo-valero went as far as to accuse the-film of plagiarizing a-new-hope and resorting to nostalgia.
rogerebert.com's-gerardo-valero felt that it "didn't [justify] a-return to the-universe" from not having an-original-story of the-universe own to tell in the-plot, characters, and musical-score, negatively comparing it to george-lucas'-prequel-trilogy, and that some of the-universe climactic-moments felt unearned.
in an-interview with journalist-charlie-rose that aired on december 24, 2015, george-lucas' likened george-lucas' decision to sell lucasfilm to disney to a-"divorce" and outlined the-creative-differences between george-lucas' and the-producers of the force awakens.
george-lucas' described the-previous-star-wars-films as george-lucas' "children" and criticized the-"retro-feel" of the force awakens, saying: "i worked very hard to make [my-films] completely different, with different-planets, with different-spaceships—you know, to make my-films] new."
george-lucas' also likened disney to "white-slavers", which drew some-criticism; george-lucas' subsequently apologized.
in a-2019-memoir, disney-chairman-bob-iger said that george-lucas "couldn't even hide george-lucas disappointment" towards j.-j.-abrams'-interpretation.
according to disney-chairman-bob-iger, george-lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the-film, and that "there weren't enough-visual-or-technical-leaps forward".
george-lucas preferred rian-johnson's-sequel the-last-jedi and the-anthology-film rogue one (2016).
accolades ===
several-awards held  several-awards nominations before the-december-release of the-force awakens, making the-force awakens ineligible for the-73rd-golden-globe-awards and some-other-awards-ceremonies.
however, the-force-awakens was added to the-21st-critics'-choice-awards'-slate of best-picture-nominees after a-special-vote by the-board of directors, and the-announcement of the-2015-american-film-institute-awards was delayed until after the-release of the-force-awakens, where the-force-awakens was named one of top-ten-films of the-year.
the force awakens received five-academy-award-nominations at the-88th-academy-awards, including best-original-score, best-sound-editing, best sound mixing, best-film-editing, and best-visual-effects.
the force awakens garnered four-nominations at the-69th-british-academy-film-awards for best-original-music, best-sound, and best-production-design, including two-wins, one for best-special-visual-effects and a-bafta-rising-star-award for john-boyega.
the-force-awakens was nominated for best-picture at the-2015-american-film-institute-awards.
the-film received seven-visual-effects-society-awards-nominations, winning four, including outstanding-visual-effects in an-effects-driven-feature-motion-picture.
the-film received the-most-nominations at the-21st-empire-awards, including best-film, best sci-fi/fantasy film, best-director for j.-j.-abrams, best-male-newcomer for john-boyega, and best-female-newcomer for daisy-ridley.
the force awakens received 13-nominations at the-42nd-saturn-awards, where it won in eight-categories, including best-science-fiction-film, best-writing, best-actor for harrison-ford, best-supporting-actor for adam-driver, best-music, best-special-effects, best-editing, and best-make-up.
daisy-ridley and john-boyega each received several-nominations and accolades for daisy-ridley and john-boyega each performances.
daisy-ridley and john-boyega each were nominated as best-newcomers at various-critics-circle and associations, including the-alliance of women-film-journalists, and the-florida-film-critics-circle
, force awakens received 11-nominations at the-mtv-movie-awards, including movie of the-year, best-female-performance for daisy-ridley, best-breakthrough-performance for boyega, and best-virtual-performance for lupita-nyong'o and andy-serkis.
sequels == ===
the-last-jedi ===
rian-johnson confirmed in august 2014 that rian-johnson would write and direct the-last-jedi, which was released on december 15, 2017.
mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, andy-serkis, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, gwendoline-christie, jimmy-vee, and joonas-suotamo reprised  mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, andy-serkis, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, gwendoline-christie, jimmy-vee, and joonas-suotamo roles in the-film, and are joined by kelly-marie-tran, laura-dern, and benicio-del-toro.
the-rise of skywalker ===
the-rise of skywalker was released on december 20, 2019.
j.-j.-abrams directed the-film and co-wrote the-film with chris-terrio.
hamill, fisher, driver, ridley, boyega, isaac, daniels, nyong'o, suotamo, and tran reprised suotamo, and tran roles in the-film, and are joined by naomi-ackie, keri-russell, and richard-e.-grant.
billy-dee-williams returns from the-original-trilogy as lando-calrissian and ian-mcdiarmid returns from original-and-prequel-trilogies as palpatine.
notes == ==
references ==
works cited ==
szostak, phil (2019).
the-art of star-wars: the-rise of skywalker.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419740381.
further-reading ==
hidalgo, pablo (2015).
star-wars:
the-force awakens:
the-visual-dictionary.
new-york: dk-publishing.
isbn 978-1-4654-3816-4.
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-force awakens at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-force awakens at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-force awakens at imdb-star-wars:
the-force awakens at allmovie
star-wars:
the-force awakens title listing at the-internet-speculative-fiction-database
star-wars:
the-force awakens on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-force awakens at disney-a to z-star-trek:
enterprise is an-american-science-fiction-television-series that debuted on upn on september 26, 2001, and ran for four-seasons until may 13, 2005.
enterprise was the-series, and was intended to serve as a-prequel to star-trek: the-original-series.
enterprise was originally entitled enterprise, but was renamed to add the-star-trek-prefix towards the-start of the-third-season.
the-series was created by rick-berman and brannon-braga, both of whom served as executive-producers throughout the-four-seasons.
both of whom stood down as show runners during the-fourth-season, with manny-coto taking on the-role instead.
the-casting-team pursued scott-bakula for the-role of jonathan-archer, with no-other-actors in mind.
there were extended-contract-negotiations, and scott-bakula signed up for another-pilot during the-talks which didn't go to series, and scott-bakula instead signed for enterprise.
both-anthony-montgomery and dominic-keating had previously auditioned for roles on star-trek: voyager and were hired when anthony-montgomery and dominic-keating returned for enterprise.
braga later explained that the-most-difficult-casting-process was for the-role of t'pol, who had been originally envisioned as the-character t'pau from the-original-series-episode "amok-time".
jolene-blalock was cast after attending the-final-casting-session, after jolene-blalock agents had previously rejected invitations to attend auditions.
some-recurring-characters were played by actors who had previously appeared in the-franchise, with jeffrey-combs portraying the-andorian-shran, making jeffrey-combs first appearance in the-season-one-episode "the-andorian-incident".
jeffrey-combs had previously portrayed the-characters weyoun and brunt on deep-space-nine.
vaughn-armstrong, who played admiral-maxwell-forrest in enterprise, had previously appeared in a-number of roles throughout the-franchise since portraying a-klingon in the-next-generation episode "heart of glory" and by the-end of the enterprise run, jeffrey-combs had appeared as 13-different-characters in total.
randy-oglesby, rick-worthy and scott-macdonald had also appeared in a-variety of parts within the-franchise before taking on the-recurring-parts of xindi-council-members throughout the-third-season.
main-cast ===
scott-bakula as jonathan-archer, commanding-officer of the-uss-enterprise nx-01 jolene-blalock as t'pol, first-officer-and-science-officer.
john-billingsley as phlox, chief-medical-officer.
dominic-keating as malcolm-reed, chief-security/tactical-officer.
anthony-montgomery as travis-mayweather, conn-officer.
linda-park as hoshi-sato, communications-officer.
connor-trinneer as charles-"trip" tucker-iii, chief-engineer.
recurring-cast ===
nathan-anderson as n.-kemper, united earth military-assault-command-operations (maco)-officer.
vaughn-armstrong as maxwell-forrest, flag-officer in charge of the-nx-project at starfleet-command.
molly-brink as talas, officer in the-andorian-imperial-guard.
joanna-cassidy as t'les, instructor at the-vulcan-science-academy and mother of t'pol.
jeffrey-combs as thy'lek-shran, commander in the-andorian-imperial-guard.
steven-culp as j.-hayes, maco-commanding-officer.
daniel-dae-kim as d.-chang, maco-officer.
jim-fitzpatrick as marcus-williams, officer in the-nx-project at starfleet-command.
john-fleck as silik, officer of the-suliban-cabal.
gary-graham as soval, vulcan-ambassador to earth.
james-horan as the-humanoid-figure,
a-messenger from the-future.
ken-lally as taylor, archer's-steward.
scott-macdonald as dolim, officer serving on the-xindi-council.
ada-maris as erika-hernandez, commanding-officer of the-uss-columbia
sean-mcgowan as f.-hawkins, maco-officer.
randy-oglesby as degra, scientist on the-xindi-council.
eric-pierpoint as harris, section 31 operative.
michael-reilly-burke as koss, a-vulcan-architect arranged to marry t'pol.
daniel-riordan as duras, klingon-commander.
tucker-smallwood as a-xindi-primate-councillor, member of the-xindi-council.
kellie-waymire as elizabeth-cutler, science-officer.
joseph will as michael-rostov, engineering-officer.
matt-winston as daniels, a-temporal-agent from the-31st-century.
rick-worthy as jannar, member of the-xindi-council.
appearances == =
main-cast (credited)
recurring-cast (4+)   =
guest-cast (1-3) ==
see also ==
list of star-trek:
the-original-series cast members list of star-trek: deep space nine cast members list of star-trek:
the-next-generation-cast-members-list of star-trek:
voyager-cast-members list of star-trek:
discovery cast members ==
citations == ==
references ==
captain-planet and the-planeteers is an-american-animated-environmentalist-superhero-television-series created by ted-turner, barbara-pyle and robert-larkin-iii, and developed by pyle, nicholas-boxer, thom-beers, andy-heyward, robby-london, bob-forward and cassandra-schafausen.
the-series was produced by turner-program-services and dic-enterprises and broadcast on tbs from september 15, 1990, to december 5, 1992.
a-sequel-series, the-new-adventures of captain-planet, was produced by hanna-barbera-cartoons, inc., distributed by turner-program-services and broadcast from september 11, 1993, to may 11, 1996.
a-sequel-series, the-new-adventures of captain-planet continue today in syndication.
the-program is a-form of edutainment and advocates environmentalism and is known for having a-number of famous-actors providing voices for the-villains.
the-program spawned a-franchise consisting of a-charity, video-games, and a-tv-crossover with ok-k.o.!
let's be heroes.
our-world is in peril.
gaia, the-spirit of the-earth, can no longer stand the-terrible-destruction plaguing our-planet.
she sends five-magic-rings to five-special-young-people:
kwame, from africa, with the-power of earth...
from north-america, wheeler, with the-power of fire...
from eastern-europe, linka, with the-power of wind.
from asia, gi, with the-power of water... and from south-america,-ma-ti, with the-power of heart.
when the-five-powers combine, the-five-powers summon earth's-greatest-champion, captain-planet.
every-episode is followed up with at-least-one-"planeteer-alert"-clip, often connected to the-plot, where environmental-political-and-other-social-political-issues are discussed and how the-viewer can contribute and be part of "the-solution" rather than "the-pollution".
characters == ===
gaia (voiced by whoopi-goldberg in 1990–1992, margot-kidder in 1993–1996), is the-spirit of the-planet who sends five-magic-rings – four with the-power to control an-element of nature and one controlling the-element of heart – to five-chosen-youths across the-globe.
she claims to have been asleep for the-entire-20th-century and awoken to see a-more-polluted-world than when she was last awake, however this is contradicted by a-flashback-episode set in the 1920s in which people get guidance from gaia.
she-appearance seems to be a-mixture of attractive-women of all-races, and is often seen as an-intangible-spirit.
however, in cases of serious-problems, gaia gains corporeal-form, which puts she in danger of death.
in the-two-part-episode-"summit to save earth" where she rival zarm had defeated she, gaia was shown as an-old,-frail-woman, with her rival zarm explaining that given the earth's several billion years of existence, it would make sense for gaia to be superannuated in appearance.
captain-planet ===
in situations that the-planeteers cannot resolve alone, the-planeteers can combine the-planeteers planetary powers to summon the-titular-captain-planet (voiced by david-coburn), who is ma-ti's magnified heart power in the-form of a-holographic-superhero-android that possesses all of the-other-planeteers'-magnified-powers.
once his-work is done, the-titular-captain-planet returns to the-titular-captain-planet, and leaves viewers with the-message: "
the-power is yours!"
typically planet only manifests to deal with the-bigger-crisis and then departs, but a-few-storylines have explored him existing beyond these-moments, such as when him was summoned while kwame and ma-ti were in space, with the-result that the-energy from kwame and ma-ti rings that created planet could not return to planet source, resulting in planet being forced to operate on a-human-level, such as requiring a-crowbar and handcuff keys to rescue the-rest of the-team.
planeteers ===
planeteers === are tasked with helping defend planet from environmental-disasters and making efforts to educate humankind to keep others from happening.
in the-beginning of the-episodes, gaia uses her "planet-vision" in the-crystal-chamber to discover where the-most-devastating-destruction is occurring (in most-episodes one or more of the-eco-villains is behind the-eco-villains) and sends the-planeteers to help solve the-problem.
the-planeteers use transportation (usually-a-flying-machine called a geo-cruiser) based on solar-power to avoid causing pollution themselves.
kwame (voiced by levar-burton) - hailing from africa, kwame possesses the-power of earth.
wheeler (voiced by joey-dedio) -
from new-york-city, wheeler controls the-power of fire.
linka (voiced by kath-soucie) -
from the-soviet-union (in later-episodes stated as being from russia after the-communist-regime's-collapse), linka has the-power of wind.
(voiced by janice-kawaye)
- hailing from asia, gi controls the-power of water.
ma-ti (voiced by scott-menville) - from brazil, ma-ti wields the-power of heart.
suchi (vocal-effects provided by frank-welker) --ma-ti's-pet-monkey.
villains === ====
eco-villains ====
the-eco-villains are a-small-group of antagonists who cause danger to the-planet through pollution, deforestation, poaching, and other-environmentally-unsafe-activities.
they enjoy the-destruction they cause to captain-planet and the-harm they bring to obtain wealth, land, or power.
the-eco-villains tend to work alone most of the-time, although the-eco-villains're willing to work with one another when the-eco-villains suits the-eco-villains plans.
only in the-two-part-episode-"summit to save earth" did the-entire-ensemble of eco-villains work as a-team with zarm as the-leader.
each of the-eco-villains represents a-specific-way of thought that can cause ecological-problems.
hoggish-greedly (voiced by ed-asner) – a-pig-like-human who represents the-dangers of overconsumption and greed, hoggish is the-first-villain captain-planet and the-planeteers-encounter.
in the-episode "smog-hog", it's revealed hoggish has a-son named hoggish greedly jr.
(voiced by charlie-schlatter) who appears only once and had gotten affected by a-son named hoggish greedly jr. polluting road hog plot.
because of this, greedly had to work with captain-planet to save greedly son's life.
in the-episode "hog-tide," it is revealed that he has a-grandfather named don porkaloin (portrayed as a-parody of vito-corleone from the-godfather and also voiced by ed-asner) who in the-past was defeated by another-group of planeteers.
unlike hoggish-greedly, porkaloin became environmentally friendly as shown in the-episode "the-ghost of porkaloin past".
rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) --greedly's-main-henchman.
rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman once claimed that the-main-reason  rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman works for greedly is because no-one else would hire  rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman.
rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman does sometime question greedly's-orders-and-shows-concern when greedly's-actions hurt the-environment though greedly's-actions never has any-effect on  rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman boss, and  rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman, for the-most-part, remains loyal to greedly.
rigger (voiced by john-ratzenberger) - greedly's-main-henchman does all-the-leg-work while greedly usually sits around and eats.
verminous-skumm (voiced by jeff-goldblum in season 1, maurice-lamarche in season 2-5) – the-second-villain to appear on the-series
, he is a-part-human,-part-rat-creature who represents urban-blight, disease, and drug-abuse.
skumm can control rats and has skumm own personal-helicopter called the scum o'copter.
skumm is responsible for the-death of linka's-cousin boris via drugs in the-episode "mind-pollution."
in some of the-later-episodes skumm partook in war-profiteering when selling weapons to different-gangs.
rat-pack---a-group of humanoid-rats that work for verminous-skumm.
duke-nukem (voiced by dean-stockwell in 1990–1992, maurice-lamarche in 1993–1995) – a-doctor who changed dean-stockwell into a-radioactive-mutant who represents the-misuse of nuclear-power, and the-third-villain to appear.
dean-stockwell is one of the-few-eco-villains, along with zarm and captain-pollution, able to battle captain-planet one-on-one.
duke-nukem generates radiation to fire off radioactive-blasts from dean-stockwell-hands and possesses x-ray-vision.
apogee temporarily renamed the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise to 'duke-nukum' so as to avoid any-possible-trademark-claims they could face from the-producers of captain-planet.
the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise was later found to be under no-trademark and the-games were restored to the-games original titles.
leadsuit (voiced by frank-welker) - duke-nukem's-henchman, leadsuit's name defines the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise-appearance as the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise wears a-full-bodied-lead-suit in order to withstand the-radiation released by duke-nukem's-body.
the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise revealed that the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise works for duke-nukem because when nukem takes over the-world, the-eponymous-character of the-duke-nukem-computer-game-franchise'll get to be second in command.
leadsuit is timid, rarely arguing with nukem (and always losing if leadsuit objects to anything).
leadsuit is afraid of the-dark, and usually gives in at the-slightest-trouble.
dr.-barbara-"babs"-blight (voiced by meg-ryan in 1990-1991, mary-kay-bergman in 1992–1996, tessa-auberjonois in ok-k.o.!
let's be heroes) –
the-fourth-villain revealed, dr.-blight is a-mad-scientist who represents the-dangers of uncontrolled-technology and unethical-scientific-experimentation.
as a-result of self-experimentation, the-left-half of her-face is horribly scarred; this is usually hidden by her-hair.
in the-episode "hog-tide,"  in the-episode "hog-tide is revealed that dr.-blight had a-grandmother named betty blight who assisted don-porkaloin in dr.-blight plot.
in the-episode "hollywaste", it is revealed that bambi.
bambi calls dr.-blight by bambi nickname "babs".
ozone-slayer-mal (voiced by david-rappaport in 1990, tim-curry in 1991-1996) - dr.-blight's-artificial-intelligence-computerized-aerosol-spraycan-husband and henchman.
ozone-slayer-mal (voiced by david-rappaport in 1990, tim-curry in 1991-1996) - dr.-blight's-artificial-intelligence-computerized-aerosol-spraycan-husband and henchman has the-ability to hack into other-computer-systems, take over the-ability to hack into other-computer-systems and reprogram the-ability to hack into other-computer-systems mainly to dr.-blight's-specifications.
mal is often the control and main power source of everything in dr.-blight's-labs as well as the-vehicles
mal travels in.
looten-plunder (voiced by james-coburn in 1990–1992, ed-gilbert in 1993–1996) – a-wealthy-poacher and crooked-businessman who represents the-evils of unethical-business-actions.
looten is the-sixth-villain to appear on captain-planet in the-seventh-episode, "the last of looten kind".
looten is also shown to have a-nephew named robin plunder.
looten-name was a-play on the-term "loot and plunder", and looten was always in the-ending-credits of every-episode when the-singer mentioned "bad-guys who like to...loot and plunder!",
taken from footage of one-episode where a-disshelved-plunder sees a-disshelved-plunder scheme in ruins and screams "you will pay for this, captain planet!".
plunder is the-only-eco-villain to come out on top as the-planeteers lose after failing to provide proof that plunder was illegally cutting down trees.
argos-bleak (voiced by s.-scott-bullock) - looten-plunder's-main-henchman and bodyguard , argos-bleak (voiced by s.-scott-bullock) - looten-plunder's-main-henchman and bodyguard also functions as a-mercenary and carries out most of plunder's-dirty-work.
he seems to have a-military-background as he is seen in many-episodes flying-helicopters or other-aircraft, and is proficient in handling firearms.
argos even got he own episode "the-preditor", where he appeared without he boss to hunt down sharks.
another-time where plunder conspired with hoggish greedily, argos-bleak was seen arguing with rigger as to who was the-better-eco-villain.
pinehead-brothers (voiced by dick-gautier and frank-welker) –
oakey and dokey are two-oversized-lumberjacks that are looten-plunder's-henchmen in the-final-season of "the-new-adventures of captain-planet."
sly-sludge (voiced by martin-sheen in 1990–1992, jim-cummings in 1993–1995) –
an-unscrupulous-waste-collector who represents laziness, ignorance, and the-dangers of apathy and short-term-thinking.
however, as many of an-unscrupulous-waste-collector who represents laziness, ignorance, and the-dangers of apathy and short-term-thinking-schemes involve waste-management, which is a-legitimate-environmental-issue, an-unscrupulous-waste-collector who represents laziness, ignorance, and the-dangers of apathy and short-term-thinking often uses that to gain apparent-respectability.
sludge is the-last-villain to be revealed.
an-unscrupulous-waste-collector who represents laziness, ignorance, and the-dangers of apathy and short-term-thinking is also the-only-main-villain to defect to the-planeteers where a-recycling-program of an-unscrupulous-waste-collector who represents laziness, ignorance, and the-dangers of apathy and short-term-thinking makes a-lot of money by the-end of "no-small-problem" enabling sludge to propose plans to mass-produce an-affordable,-eco-friendly-way to safely dispose of waste.
ooze (voiced by cam-clarke) - sly-sludge's-henchman.
tank-flusher-iii (voiced by frank-welker) – sly-sludge's-strongman-servant who makes his-debut in "the-new-adventures of captain-planet"-episode "
a-mine is a-terrible-thing to waste" pt.
zarm (voiced by sting in 1990–1992, david-warner in 1993, malcolm-mcdowell in 1994–1995) – a-former-spirit of the-planet who left gaia in search of other-worlds and ended up laying other-populous-planets to ruin lacking gaia to balance out david-warner methods.
he represents war and destruction.
even though zarm does not have any-henchmen of zarm own, zarm would often manipulate other-people to do zarm bidding.
zarm once-united-hoggish-greedly,-looten-plunder, sly-sludge, duke-nukem, verminous-skumm, and dr.-blight under zarm leadership in the-two-part-episode-"summit to save earth."
other times he recruits and manipulates others, even-the-planeteers, to work for he.
zarm is the-fifth-eco-villain to appear in the-series, having he first appearance in the-sixth-episode.
outside of war and destruction, zarm promoted hatred and totalitarianism, which he believed were the-most-dangerous-pollutants to mankind, as evidenced by he acting as kingmaker to a-dictator named morgar.
zarm admits zarm has been a-guiding-force for every-despot of the-20th-century, but admits one of them actually declined zarm help and challenges the-planeteers to guess who saying "i think you'll be pleasantly surprised."
captain-pollution ====
a-polluting-counterpart to captain-planet named captain pollution (voiced by david-coburn, like captain-planet good counterpart) appears in the-two-part-episode-"mission to save earth" when  dr.-blight steals the-planeteers-rings, creates polluting-duplicates of the-planeteers'-rings, and distributes the-duplicates to most of the-other-eco-villains.
each-eco-villain received a-specific-ring which had the-opposite-power of the-planeteers: duke-nukem has a-super-radiation-ring (counterpart of fire).
looten-plunder has a-deforestation-ring (counterpart of earth).
sly-sludge has a-smog-ring (counterpart of wind).
verminous-skumm has a-toxics-ring (counterpart of water).
dr.-blight has a-hate-ring (counterpart of heart).each of the-evil-rings has malevolent-faces on the-evil-rings, in contrast to the-more-element-themed-planeteer-rings.
captain-pollution is weakened when captain-pollution is in contact with pure-elements such as clean-water or sunlight, while captain-pollution gains power from contact with pollutants, being able to absorb pollutant and emit radioactive-rays (and is later shown to gain limitless-power when in contact with pollutants after captain-pollution resurrection).
when captain-pollution is summoned captain-pollution says "by your-polluting-powers combined, i am captain-pollution!
and when he disappears, he declares "the-polluting-power is yours!"
in his-first-appearance, his is sent by the-eco-villains to destroy the-planeteers but gets chased off by commander-clash, and after a-fight with captain-planet, his-returns to the-evil-rings causing them to explode.
in the-two-part-episode "a-mine is a-terrible-thing to waste", captain-pollution is brought back to life by toxins of the-five-evil-rings that seep into captain-planet.
captain-pollution is captain-planet polar opposite in personality as well as power.
in contrast to captain-planet's-generous-and-altruistic-nature, pollution is lazy, and arrogant, seeing himself as a-god and himself-creators as servants rather than partners.
captain-planet sums up the-difference in their-outlook during their-first-battle by taunting that the-planeteers have no-boss - their are a-team - and this is why pollution will always lose.
captain-pollution resembles captain-planet, but  captain-pollution skin is pale yellow and covered in brown-lesions.
captain-pollution-hair is red and styled in a-widow's-peak and  captain-pollution has red-eyes.
captain-pollution-costume is the-same-color and style as captain-planet's, but the-globe on  captain-pollution-chest is torn in the-middle.
captain-pollution-voice is similar to captain-planets, but his-voice has a-california-valley-twang to his-voice.
captain-pollution is defeated twice by captain-planet; first in "mission to save earth" by being rammed through earth, lava, air and water, and then again in "
a-mine is a-terrible-thing to waste" by being tricked into going into an-underground-magma-chamber.
captain-pollution is destroyed by captain-planet who throws pollution in the-water destroying captain-pollution.
other-villains ===
the-slaughters---a-family of poachers who made the-slaughters---a-family of poachers who made their-debut in "the-new-adventures of captain-planet-debut in "the-new-adventures of captain-planet.
" the-slaughters represent the-endangerment of animals and the-evils of poaching and are often in direct-monetary-competition with looten-plunder.
mame-and-mame-family once collaborated with looten-plunder and argos-bleak in the-episode "horns-a'plenty" when the-planeteers ruined each-one's-rhinoceros-poaching.
mame-slaughter (voiced by theresa-saldana in the-first-appearance, mitzi-mccall in the-second-appearance) - the-leader of the-slaughters-stalker-slaughter
(voiced by charlie-adler) –
one of mame's-sons and her-second-in-command.
episodes == ==
development == ===
conception ===
according to barbara-pyle, the-inspiration for the-five-planeteers came from real-people that barbara-pyle met during the-show's-pre-production in 1989.
in a-september-2012-interview with barbara-pyle and co-developer-nicholas-boxer, it was stated that the-hope-island was located near the-bahamas.
dic-history (1990–1992) ===
the-original-series was the second longest running us-cartoon of the 1990s, producing 113-episodes.
the-original-series lasted for three-seasons under the-name captain-planet and the-planeteers (produced by tbs-productions and dic).
the-show's-intro-theme was composed by tom-worrall.
the-ending-theme (maintained by both-dic and hanna-barbera's-versions) is considered one of the-most-memorable-parts of the-series due to the-series catchy main-chorus and rock-track ("captain-planet, he's our-hero, gonna take pollution down to zero").
the-series-lyrics were written by show-producer-nick-boxer and is performed by murray-mcfadden and timothy-mulhollan.
during the-end-credits, james-coburn, in character as looten-plunder, utters the-line "you'll pay for this, captain planet.".
this is then followed by a-rap from the-voice-actors of the-planeteers.
it is akin to new-kids
on the-block's-"step by step".
== = hanna-barbera-history (1993–1996) ===
in 1993, the-show saw a-production-company switch, changing the-title to the-new-adventures of captain-planet (produced by hanna-barbera-cartoons, which was acquired by turner in 1991).
during this-time, it aired as part of tbs'  sunday-morning
in front of the-tv  block, alongside fellow-h-b-toons-swat-kats:
the-radical-squadron and 2-stupid-dogs.
this-series revealed more of the-past of each of the-characters and expanded on this-series dramatically.
the-tone of these-episodes was more mature than this-series.
the-animation-style was altered.
the-dic-seasons'-synth-rock-soundtrack was replaced by a-large-number of orchestral-pieces, and while the-end-credits-theme was retained, the-ending-sequence now showcased footage from the-hanna-barbera-episodes.
full-time-voice-actors replaced most of the-major-celebrities that had voiced gaia and the-eco-villains during the-dic-seasons.
the-opening-narration was spoken by david-coburn (captain-planet) rather than levar-burton (kwame) and, in the-final-season, was replaced by a-rap by fred-schneider of the b-52's.
legacy ===
the-captain-planet-foundation (cpf) was founded in 1991, when series-producer-barbara-pyle negotiated a-percentage of the-show's-merchandising-revenue to empower young-people.
the-concept allowed schools and organizations around the-world to present schools and organizations around the-world environmental projects to the-captain-planet-foundation (cpf) and receive seed-money to grow schools and organizations around the-world ideas.
in 2001, time-warner decided to shut down the-captain-planet-foundation-(cpf) due to a-challenging-merger with aol.
laura-seydel-and-laura-seydel-husband rutherford-seydel worked with time-warner to orchestrate the-transition of the-captain-planet-foundation (cpf) to a-public-charity - the-captain-planet-foundation.
in 2007, cpf acquired the-rights to exhibit previous-episodes of captain-planet and the-planeteers online and on-air, thus "allowing this-valuable-resource to reach out and educate the-children of today!"
as of 2017, the-organization's-board is chaired by laura-turner-seydel, daughter of ted-turner; the-organization's-board includes barbara-pyle.
educational-goals ==
various-episodes were constructed to touch on relevant-themes to a-modern-audience.
"mind-pollution"the-episode titled "mind-pollution" (1991)
was notable for dealing with the-issue of drug-abuse.
this was explained by the-fact that the-characters thought of drug-addiction as "pollution of the-mind".
the-episode revolved around an-epidemic of a-designer-drug known as "bliss" created by verminous-skumm.
the-episode included a-scene of linka's-cousin-boris jumping through a-window and dying from a-drug-overdose.
"population-bomb""population-bomb" (1991) continued the-trend of tackling controversial-subject-matter atypical for a-children's-cartoon, in this-instance the problem with overpopulation.
using mice as substitutes for humans, the-episode sets wheeler on a-gulliver's-travels-style-adventure where wheeler encounters a-tribe of sentient-mice who are destroyed by overpopulation and irresponsible-leadership.
it turns out that the-ordeal is something that wheeler dreamed up, though it serves as a-warning for the-audience about sustainability and over-consumption. "
a-formula for hate"the episode titled "a-formula for hate" (1992) was also unusual for the-series in that it was the-first-episode in an-american-children's-animated-series to directly deal with the-hiv/aids-pandemic.
in the-episode, skumm brainwashes a-local-community into thinking the-virus can be spread through casual-contact and thus causing people to hate and fear a-young-man, infected with hiv, named todd andrews (voiced by neil-patrick-harris, with neil-patrick-harris mother voiced by elizabeth-taylor).
franchise-extension ==
pyle and boxer demanded that the-series'-merchandise be made sustainably; because of this, several of the-companies producing captain-planet-themed-merchandise had to completely overhaul the-companies producing captain-planet-themed-merchandise means of production to manufacture recycled-and-recyclable-products.
as with many-popular-cartoons, captain-planet had a-line of action-figures and vehicles.
released by tiger-toys in 1990, a-line of action-figures and vehicles ran for several-years, long enough to tie into the-new-adventures-series.
tiger-toys were repackaged and sold by tiger-toys in canada and kenner throughout europe.
tiger-toys were of average-poseability, with the-common-five-points – neck, shoulders, and hips.
finding a-comprehensive-list of what was released is difficult, since tiger-toys shown in the-initial-retailer-catalog were even released.
the-collector's-market is small, the-toys being somewhat rare on ebay.
the-captain-planet-foundation still sells a-small-number of the-captain-planet-foundation online, however.
there may have also been further-foreign-variations of certain-toys which may be even more difficult to catalog.
various-toys from the-new-adventures-waves are not as likely to be well known.
the-five-planeteers, five-eco-villains, commander-clash, and several-versions of captain-planet, each with a-different-gimmick-or-paint-scheme, were released, along with several-vehicles.
a-toy-ring with lights and sound-and-interchangeable-lenses for the-five-elements was also released.
four-small-vehicles were also sold through a-burger-king-promotion.
video-games ===
a-video-game based on the-series was developed for the-nintendo-entertainment-system by mindscape called captain planet.
the-game, which involved a-good-deal of shooting, received negative-reviews from game-critics and thus a-sega-mega-drive-(genesis)-version of the-game was cancelled.
a-separate-side-scrolling-game was developed by novalogic for the-mega-drive/genesis, but only saw release in europe and australia.
david-perry and nick-bruty developed a-zx-spectrum-and-amstrad-cpc-game using the-license,
a-3-level shoot 'em up.
a-game was also released in 1990 for the-commodore-amiga and atari-st, written by tony-crowther.
this was a-platform-game and was briefly bundled with the-amiga-500-"cartoon-classics"-pack released in 1991.
a-commodore-64-game was in development but never released.
tiger-toys, owners of the-action-figure-license, also created an-lcd-hand-held-game.
captain-planet appears as a-playable-character in the-fighting-game cartoon-network:
punch-time-explosion for nintendo-3ds, wii, ps3, and xbox 360.
home-media ===
turner-home-entertainment originally released vhs-tapes of the-series, which contained a-single-episode on each.
dic's-main-home-video-distributor buena-vista-home-video would also release single-episode vhs releases as well.
a-dvd with four-episodes and bonus-features exists but was only available as part of a-"planeteer-pack" purchased from the-captain-planet-foundation.
this-promotional-dvd contained the-episodes "a-river ran through it", "a perfect world", "gorillas will be missed", and "the big clam up".
a-short-clip titled " planeteers in action", which is about the--captain-planet-foundation, is also included.
the "planeteer pack" special is no longer available.
factory under license from turner and warner-home-video released a-dvd-set of the-complete-first-season in the-u.s. on april 19, 2011.
the-dvd-packaging is made of 100%-recycled-paper.
madman-entertainment released the-first-season on july 6, 2016 and the-complete-collection on october 25, 2017 in australia.
as of march 25, 2017-madman-entertainment is available on itunes for purchase.
the-whole-series was made available on amazon-instant-video.
multiple-attempts have been made to create a-film-adaptation of the-series.
the first occurred in 1996 when boxer and pyle wrote a-film-adaptation of captain-planet originally titled planet.
five years later, michael-reaves revised the-concept as dark-planet or planet.
the-storyline was darker than the-series, and set in a-post-apocalyptic-time-period.
however, the-script was lost when turner and warner-bros. merged in 1996.
the-film reached the-design-stage before the-film was abandoned.
other-attempts at a-film-version were made in 2007, 2011, and 2013, but none of these-versions came to pass.
in october 2016 paramount-pictures and leonardo-dicaprio's-appian-way were attempting to develop a-new-movie and is in negotiations with jono-matt and glen-powell to write the-script.
the-status of the-project is unclear since there were no-further-news of film-adaptation.
comic-books ===
marvel-comics published a-comic-series titled captain planet and the planeteers.
a-comic-series titled captain planet and the-planeteers ran twelve-issues, cover dated october 1991 through october 1992.
crossover ===
captain-planet appeared in a-special-crossover-episode of the-cartoon-network-series-ok-k.o.!
letcaptain-planet be heroes, with david-coburn reprising david-coburn role as captain-planet and levar-burton reprising david-coburn role as kwame.
the-heroes battled dr.-blight (accompanied by a-silent-mal).
the-episode "
the-power is yours" aired on october 9, 2017.
references == ==
external-links ==
planeteer-movement-captain-planet-foundation-captain-planet at don-markstein's-toonopedia.
archived from the original on april 9, 2012.
planeteer-movement-captain-planet-foundation-captain-planet at don-markstein's-toonopedia and the-planeteers at imdb
captain-planet
and-the-planeteers at the-big-cartoon-database
the-new-adventures of  captain-planet at the-big-cartoon-database
template-tv.com-show is being considered for deletion.› captain-planet and the-planeteers at tv.com
kylo-ren is a-fictional-character and a-major-antagonist in the-star-wars-franchise.
introduced in the-2015-film star-wars: the-force awakens,  kylo-ren is portrayed by adam-driver.
kylo-ren is the-chosen-name of ben-solo, the-only-child of original-star-wars-trilogy-characters-han-solo and princess-leia-organa.
though trained by  kylo-ren-uncle-luke-skywalker as a-jedi,  kylo-ren was seduced to the-dark-side of the-force by supreme-leader-snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as  kylo-ren grandfather, the-sith-lord-darth-vader.
kylo-ren is eventually redeemed like  kylo-ren grandfather before  kylo-ren and helps rey in  kylo-ren fight against  kylo-ren grandfather, the-revived-emperor-palpatine.
ren is also the-master of the-knights of ren, as well as a-commander and later-the-supreme-leader of the-first-order, an-organization spawned from the-former-galactic-empire.
ren appears in the force awakens, the last jedi (2017), star wars resistance (2018-2020), and the rise of skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
driver's-performance received acclaim from critics and fans.
for  ren-performance in the force awakens, driver won the-saturn-award for best-supporting-actor, making  ren the-first-star-wars-actor since alec-guinness to win the-award.
driver received a-second-nomination in the-same-category for driver performance in the-rise of skywalker.
kylo-ren is widely regarded as one of the-greatest-villains of the 2010s  ==
concept and creation ==
abrams requested that  kylo-ren's-mask be designed to be memorable to a-child.
as late as march 2014, the-film's-main-antagonist was only known to the-production-team as "jedi-killer", and had gone through numerous-unapproved-design-attempts.
the same month, glyn-dillon's-design for the-character's-costume was finally approved.
according to abrams, "glyn-dillon's-design for the-character's-costume was meant to be a-nod to the-vader-mask," and concept-designer-doug-chiang says that the-character "takes on [the]-persona of [vader] to haunt luke."
according to the force awakens costume-designer-michael-kaplan, i don't know if it was the-kind of spaghetti-type-lines on it or what, but the-next-time j.j. came by that was what we presented to j.j. and j.j.
also the-silver in those-lines kind of reflects and changes color with the-action.
you know, if he's standing in front of fire you see that
, so he's standing in front of fire almost brings you into the-mask.
driver's-casting in the-film in an-unnamed-role was first announced on april 29, 2014.
kylo-ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
the-force awakens teaser-trailer released by lucasfilm on november 28, 2014, wielding a-jagged-red-lightsaber with a-crossguard.
the-name kylo-ren, as well as the-character's-design, was revealed by entertainment-weekly in a-lucasfilm-designed-topps-style-trading-card-mock-up on december 11, 2014.
a-may-2015-vanity-fair-photo-shoot by annie-leibovitz confirmed that driver would be portraying kylo.
according to other-cast-members, driver is a-method-actor, which meant that driver sometimes stayed in character on set as ren and left driver mask on between scenes.
driver explained that driver goal was "to forget you're in star-wars and treat his-goal like any-other-job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the-perspective of the-characters living within the-film's-universe, "darth-vader is real."
character ==
abrams told empire in august 2015, "kylo-ren is not a-sith.
kylo-ren works under supreme-leader-snoke, who is a-powerful-figure on the-dark-side of the-force."
abrams had previously told entertainment-weekly that the-character, "came to the-name kylo-ren when kylo-ren joined a-group called the knights of kylo-ren."
robbie-collin of the-telegraph described kylo-ren as "a-hot-headed,-radicalised-dark-side-jihadi, whose-red-lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as kylo-ren temper".
abrams noted, "the-lightsaber is something that  abrams built  abrams, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the-character."
the-telegraph also explains that ren's-wild-and-erratic-temper and "angsty"-instability make  abrams dangerous.
melissa-leon of the-daily-beast describes ren's-use of the-force as "formidable", citing  abrams-ability to stop a-blaster-shot-mid-air, immobilize victims and probe victims minds against victims will.
kasdan told entertainment-weekly in august 2015, "i've written four-star-wars-movies now, and there's never been a-character quite like the-one that adam plays.
i think you're going to see something that's brand new to the-saga," noting that a-character quite like the-one that adam plays is "full of emotion".
abrams explained, "i think that what makes ren so unique is that ren isn't as fully formed as when we meet a-character such as darth-vader ...
ren is not your-prototypical-mustache-twirling-bad-guy.
ren is a little bit more complex than that."
driver said in december 2015 that, despite the-visual-similarities to darth-vader, ren is "unlike any-villain the-franchise has seen".
driver explained:
i feel there's a-recklessness about him that's maybe not normally associated with the-dark-side.
you normally think of order, and structure, and full-commitment and no-hesitation ...
him's just a little bit more unpolished.
it's in him costume,
in him lightsaber—how you kind of get the-sense that it could just not work at any-moment; that it could just blow up.
that’s kind of like a-big-metaphor for him.
driver claimed that  driver was privy to several-details of kylo-ren's-backstory during the-making of the-films.
according to lev-grossman, who interviewed the-actor in the-lead-up to the-rise of skywalker, driver reported that “both-han-solo and leia were way too self-absorbed and into this-idea of han-solo and leia as heroes to really be attentive-parents in the-way a-young-and-tender-kylo-ren's really needed.”
the-backstory of how ben-solo became kylo-ren was elaborated upon in a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the-rise of kylo-ren (written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney), which was published and released by marvel-comics from december 18, 2019 to march 11, 2020.certain-aspects of kylo-ren's overall arc across the-three-films of the-sequel-trilogy were also known to driver from the-start of production on the-first-film.
kylo-ren's claimed that kylo-ren's “had one-piece of information of where it was all going...and things were building towards that.”
kylo-ren's later clarified:
j.j.-abrams told me when i met  j.j.-abrams for the-first-time that i should imagine a-journey of a-character completely opposite to darth-vader...
someone who starts as a-child and becomes a-man over the-course of three-movies.
j.j.-abrams becomes closer to  j.j.-abrams convictions, becomes more assured about  j.j.-abrams choices, but has metaphorically and physically killed  j.j.-abrams father to become  j.j.-abrams own-person.
when asked by ign in december 2017 if  j.j.-abrams believed kylo-ren was capable of redemption, the-last-jedi-writer/director-rian-johnson replied, “
yeah... are you kidding?
vader was worse than kylo ever was, i think, and  vader got redeemed.”
citing the-complexity of the-character, johnson articulated, “i don’t see the-point of trying to get behind johnson mask and learn more about johnson if all we’re going to learn is ‘yeah, johnson’s just-an-evil-bad-guy that needs to be killed.’”
the-rise of skywalker-co-writer-chris-terrio also supported this-position through comparing kylo with  vader.
according to skywalker-co-writer-chris-terrio, “ vader was complicit in genocide and cruelty and depravity.
yet there is this-inherent-optimism in star-wars that the-light in you is never truly gone.
that you can still redeem yourself right up until the-last-minute – which, in vader’s-case, was literally true...
leia never really gave up hope that kylo could be redeemed, and leia knew that rey was probably the-way that it would happen.”
abrams further elaborated on this-point: maybe it’s the-optimist in me, but i would like to think that anyone, even-someone who does the-most-horrendous-things, is redeemable.
and certainly because abrams-mother, leia, is a-believer that there is still light in abrams, it was hard to imagine that leia would be wrong about abrams.
the-rise of skywalker revealed that kylo-ren and rey were two-halves of a-“dyad” in the-force, which terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the-force”  and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”
appearances == ===
the-force awakens (2015) ===
kylo-ren first appears in the-force awakens as a-high-ranking-member in the-first-order, a-tyrannical-regime that has risen from the-remains of the-galactic-empire.
after arriving at jakku to retrieve a-map containing the-coordinates where luke-skywalker (mark-hamill) is to be found,  kylo-ren kills an-old-priest named lor san tekka (max-von-sydow), and captures resistance-pilot-poe-dameron (oscar-isaac), who has also been sent to recover the-map by general-princess-leia-organa (carrie-fisher).
kylo-ren soon learns that the-pilot had entrusted  kylo-ren astromech droid, bb-8, with the-map.
poe flees with the-help of rogue-stormtrooper-finn (john-boyega), who later finds bb-8, and the-scavenger rey (daisy-ridley).
finn, rey, and bb-8 escape jakku in the-millennium-falcon, and are soon intercepted by the-ship's-former-owner, han-solo (harrison-ford), and his-co-pilot-chewbacca (peter-mayhew).
it is revealed that ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils.
ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils was corrupted to the-dark-side of the-force by the-first-order's-supreme-leader-snoke (andy-serkis), and helped destroy luke's-new-jedi-academy.
however, ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils still feels the-pull of the-light-side of the-force and seeks the-strength to overcome the-strength from ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils grandfather darth vader, whose-burnt-helmet is in ren's possession.
arriving at maz-kanata's-(lupita-nyong'o)-castle on takodana, ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils captures rey, who ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils senses has seen the-map.
while interrogating her, ren is the-son of han and leia, originally named ben, and was once one of luke's-jedi-pupils realizes that her is strong with the-force, though unaware of it.
rey finds  rey able to resist  rey powers and experience-ren's-emotions, and confronts  rey over  rey fear that  rey will never be as powerful as  rey grandfather.
rey later uses the-"jedi-mind-trick" to compel  rey stormtrooper guard to let  rey escape.
han arrives at the-first-order's-superweapon, starkiller-base, as part of the-resistance's-plan to destroy it.
after han plants explosives to destroy the-base,  rey confronts ren—calling ren by ren real name, ben—and implores ren to abandon the-dark-side, warning ren that snoke will kill ren once ren has control of the-galaxy.
ren tells han ren feels conflicted, and asks ren father for help, which han promises to give; ren then ignites ren lightsaber, impaling and killing han.
an-enraged-chewbacca-fires at ren, wounding him.
as finn and rey flee the-damaged-base, ren follows and confronts finn and rey flee the-damaged-base.
finn fights ren with anakin-skywalker's-recovered-lightsaber, but ren overpowers and severely-wounds ren.
rey then takes up anakin-skywalker's-recovered-lightsaber and, using the-force, begins to overcome ren, striking ren on the-face with anakin-skywalker's-recovered-lightsaber.
before the-duel is finished, the-duel is finished are separated by a-seismic-fissure created by the-collapsing-base.
rey and the-others escape as snoke-orders general-hux-(domnhall-gleeson) to evacuate the-base and bring ren to ren to complete ren training.
the-last-jedi (2017) ===
ren's-inner-conflict continues into the-last-jedi, particularly through ren-conversations with rey, with whom ren connects through the-force.
rey learns from luke why ben-solo turned to the-dark-side:
luke had seen a-vision of the-destruction ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill ben in ben sleep; when ben awoke to see  luke with ben lightsaber drawn, ben turned on ben uncle and apparently destroyed the-jedi-temple.
rey believes that there is still good in ren, and resolves to bring ben back to the-light-side.
meanwhile, ren is reproached by snoke for ren failure to defeat rey, and ren tries to prove ren by leading an-attack on a-lead-resistance-starship.
ren hesitates to destroy it after sensing ren mother's presence, but ren wingmen destroy the-ship's-bridge, almost killing leia.
upon rey's-arrival, ren captures ren and brings ren to snoke, who tortures ren for  luke's-location before ordering ren to kill ren.
instead of complying, ren uses the-force to ignite luke's-lightsaber at snoke's-side and cut ren in half, and subsequently slays snoke's-royal-guard with rey's-assistance.
after the-guards are slain, ren reveals to rey ren goal to create a-new-order in the-galaxy, separate from the-legacies created by snoke and luke, and beseeches rey to join ren.
ren gets her to acknowledge that her-parents abandoned her, and tells her that despite of her being a-nobody that comes from nowhere, ren truly cares about her.
rey hesitates and then refuses to join ren, realizing that ren will not turn back to the-light-side; the two briefly struggle over anakin's-lightsaber with the-force, resulting in the-weapon breaking in half and knocking both-warriors unconscious.
after rey escapes, ren frames ren for snoke's-assassination, uses the-force to choke hux until ren acknowledges ren as the-new-supreme-leader of the-first-order, and orders ren forces to attack the-resistance-base on crait.
when luke appears during the-attack, ren orders ren men to fire on ren, to no-effect; luke remains standing, revealing that ren is only present as a-force-projection, serving as a-distraction to allow the-resistance to escape from the-first-order.
after luke vanishes, the-first-order storms the-base, but the-resistance has already evacuated.
ren shares a-final-look with rey through the-force before rey slams the-door to the-millennium-falcon and escapes with the-resistance.
the-rise of kylo-ren (2019–2020) ===
ren's-past as ben-solo is depicted in the-rise of kylo-ren.
as a-child, he is trained as a-jedi by he-uncle-luke-skywalker alongside his-fellow-students voe, hennix, and
he best-friend tai
; voe grows jealous of ben for he-superior-force-capability and luke's-perceived-favoritism and nepotism.
on a-mission to the-planet-elphrona to investigate an-ancient-jedi-outpost with luke and lor-san-tekka, ben telepathically communicates with snoke, whom luke had recently fought, for which ben respects luke.
upon arriving on the-planet, the-trio encounters the-knights of ren, a-group of force-wielding-mercenaries searching the-ruins for artifacts.
after a-brief-confrontation between the-group and luke, their-leader, ren, stops the-proceedings by activating a-kill-switch on ren lightsaber.
after   and luke agreeing to a-truce, ren unmasks and, placing ren-mask on the-ground, offers ben an-open-invitation to the-group's-ranks if ren ever desires in the-future, sensing great-capability for "the-shadow" within ren.
several years later, after collapsing-ren-hut on ren-uncle-luke after the latter apparently tried to kill ren in ren sleep, ben yells towards the-jedi-temple in outrage at luke's-actions and is terrified when a-bolt of lightning-strikes, destroying a-bolt of lightning-strikes.
later that night, voe, hennix, tai return from off-planet to find ben before the-jedi-temple.
after they are unable to sense luke's-presence, ben elaborates on the-confrontation, believing ben to have killed luke, and states that ben intends to leave -planet.
believing ben to be responsible for the-jedi-temple's-destruction, voe attacks ben only to be easily subdued with hennix and tai, and ben leaves -planet on a-nearby-shuttle, with the-trio in close-pursuit.
after considering returning to his-mother on hosnian-prime, ben instead decides to meet snoke in person after receiving another-message from his.
scarred from a-previous-encounter with luke, snoke encourages ben to seek out the-knights of ren.
traveling to the-outpost on elphrona, ben retrieves ren's-mask and puts ren's-mask on, putting the-pair in communication.
after mentioning snoke, ren invites ben to meet the-knights of ren, before ren is confronted by voe, having followed ren via a-tracker in ren ship provided by hennix.
refusing to fight, only to defend ren from voe's-attacks, ben uses the-force to catch tai after tai falls off of a-building, witnessed by tai.
however, hennix, believing ben to have killed hennix, throws ben lightsaber in a-lethal-spin at ben; in deflecting it, hennix is bisected.
leaving, ben collapses the-outpost around voe and tai to subdue voe and tai and leaves the-planet.
later, ben meets with ren-and-ren-knights, who informs ren-ren will need to provide a-"good-death" for membership.
after telling ren of the-encounter with hennix, ren states that ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although ren offers ren another-chance due to snoke having vouched for ren.
providing ren a-uniform, the-group proceeds to the-mine-moon of mimban, where ben assists the-knights in stealing an-artifact known as the-mindsplinter from miners using a-variation of the-jedi-mind-trick taught to ren by snoke.
ben is horrified when the-knights subsequently execute the-smugglers after ren had promised  ben to merely release the-smugglers.
suddenly, voe and tai, having followed  ben from tai reading  ben mind, arrive.
voe attacks the-knights of ren, while tai reasons with  ben over tai-decision to leave, and the-pair cease fighting.
witnessing this, ren snaps tai's-neck, killing ren, telling  ben that snoke was wrong and that ren doesn't wish to "live in the-shadow".
declaring that "i am the-shadow",  ben  ben takes up tai's-lightsaber and  ben own and duels ren.
while doing so, rey senses ben from across the-galaxy without knowing why, ben's mother leia senses
ben's-mother leia fall, snoke calls out ben's-mother leia praises and palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both snoke and ben, and to have destroyed the-jedi-temple, although ben remains unaware of this.
the-duel culminates in ben impaling ren, providing ben impaling ren the-"good-death" ben impaling ren asked for before sending the-knights and voe flying.
shocked at ben killing ren, voe attempts to reach for ren lightsaber, only for it to be taken by ben.
deriding her-role in hennix's and tai's-deaths and declaring that her is "not a-jedi", ben knights voe with ren's-lightsaber, before turning to find the-knights of ren kneeling before the-knights of ren, having accepted the-knights of ren as the-knights of ren new leader.
later, on ren's-ship, ben crushes the-kyber-crystal from ben own lightsaber in ben bare hand and forges ben a-new-crossguard-lightsaber in the-image of one ben had seen on elphrona, taking the-name kylo-ren, derived from "skywalker" and "solo".
the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
in the-rise of skywalker, ren has been ruling as the-supreme-leader of the-first-order for a-year.
in the-film's-beginning, ren searches for the-wayfinder to lead ren to the-sith-planet-exegol, with the-hopes of killing the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine (ian-mcdiarmid) as a-show of ren power.
when ren finds the-wayfinder and arrives on exegol, palpatine reveals that ren has been manipulating ren and the-first-order, having created snoke as a-means of turning ren to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order, a-massive-armada of xyston-class-star-destroyers designed by the-sith-eternal.
palpatine offers the-armada to ren in a-bid to form a-new-sith-empire—with ren as emperor—on the-condition that ren kill rey.
ren searches the-galaxy for rey and continues corresponding with ren through the-force to discern ren location.
rey has been searching for a-second-wayfinder; ren tries to stop ren from finding it.
eventually, ren informs rey that ren is palpatine's-granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a-dyad in the-force with extremely-powerful-potential when joined together.
he urges her once more to take he hand and to overthrow palpatine together.
rey refuses, but he is unwilling to kill her and follows her to kef-bir, the-location of the-second-wayfinder.
meeting her on the-wreckage of the-second-death-star, he destroys rey's-wayfinder and duels her.
the-duel ends with rey-impaling-ren, who had been distracted by he-dying-mother, leia, reaching out to he through the-force.
a-guilt-ridden-rey (also sensing leia's-death) uses the-force to heal he and leaves aboard he ship, after telling he that she wanted to take ben-solo's-hand, but not he.
alone on the-wreckage, ren converses with a-memory of ren father, han-solo; ren throws away ren lightsaber, renouncing ren role as supreme-leader and reclaiming ren old identity of ben-solo.
ben rushes to help rey defeat palpatine on exegol.
rey senses rey presence and uses his-presence-force-connection to give rey anakin's lightsaber, which ben uses to defeat the-knights of ren.
palpatine then senses rey-and-ben's-connection as a-dyad of the-force, and absorbs rey-and-ben's-connection as a-dyad of the-force energy to restore palpatine full power, before casting ben into an-abyss.
however, rey manages to defeat and kill palpatine before dying from the-effort.
ben climbs out of the-abyss and finds rey's-inert-body.
ben manages to transfer all of  ben life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing  ben own-life in the-process.
they share a-passionate-kiss before  ben dies peacefully in rey's-arms.
ben dies peacefully in rey's-arms fades away simultaneously as ben dies peacefully in rey's-arms mother's body becomes one with the-force at the-resistance-base.
related-works and promotional-material ===
kylo-ren is a-point of view-character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019-novelizations of the-star-wars sequel trilogy by alan-dean-foster, jason-fry, and rae-carson.
kylo-ren is a-playable-character in the 2015
the-force awakens add-on to the-disney-infinity-3.0-video-game, with an-infinity-character-figurine available separately.
the force awakens is also a-character in the-strategy-video-game
star-wars: force-arena.
hasbro has released a 3 3⁄4-inch (9.5-cm)
kylo-ren-action-figure, and a-6-inch-(15-cm)-figure in their-black-series-line.
kylo-ren is also featured in the-lego-star-wars-playsets kylo-ren's command shuttle (2015) and battle on takodana (2016), as well as a-lego-buildable-figure.
the-lego-version of kylo also appears in the-2016-short-form-animated-series lego-star-wars: the-resistance rises, and as a-playable-character in lego-star-wars: the-force awakens.
in january 2016, driver reprised the-role for a-star-wars/undercover-boss-sketch on saturday-night-live, with kylo-ren disguising kylo-ren as a-radar-technician named "matt" to determine what the-starkiller-base-employees really think of kylo-ren.
driver again reprised the-role in january 2020 for a-follow-up-saturday-night-live-sketch titled “undercover boss:
where are they now?”
in which kylo goes undercover as “randy,” an-entry-level-intern on a-star-destroyer.
in the-2017-chuck-wendig-novel-star-wars: aftermath: empire's-end, ben-solo is stated as having been born on the-planet-chandrila on the-same-day as a-peace-treaty is signed between the-remnants of the-empire and the-new-galactic-republic (about a year after return of the-jedi, or 29 years before the force awakens).
kylo-ren is also mentioned in the-2017-novel-star-wars: phasma, which takes place before the-force awakens.
kylo-ren appears in star-wars-battlefront-ii, voiced by matthew-wood and roger-craig-smith, masked and unmasked respectively.
in the-game,  kylo-ren interrogates del-meeko about lor-san-tekka's-location (who possess the-map to luke-skywalker) using his-force-abilities.
when del finally relents and reveals the-map and lor-san-tekka's-location,  kylo-ren leaves his for hask, del's former comrade in inferno-squad.
kylo-ren (voiced once again by matthew-wood) also appears in the-star-wars:
resistance-series-finale-episode
"the-escape", where he kills agent-tierny for failing to destroy the-colossus-resistance.
matthew-wood also portrayed general-grievous in both-star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith and the-tv-series
star-wars: the-clone-wars.
kylo-ren is also one of the-numerous-voices heard in the-fourth-and-final-season of star-wars: rebels in the-episode "a-world between worlds", with an-excerpt of driver's-dialogue from the force awakens being used.
kylo-ren appears as a-walk-around-character within star-wars: galaxy's-edge at disneyland and disney's-hollywood-studios.
kylo-ren appears during star-tours – the-adventures continue and star-wars:
rise of the-resistance, with the latter featuring the-character in audio-animatronic-form with driver providing the-voice.
on november 28, 2019, ichikawa-ebizō-xi starred as kairennosuke in star-wars-kabuki: kairennosuke and the-three-shining-swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜,-sutā-uōzu-kabuki ~rennosuke
kōjin-san-pon~)
,-a-kabuki-production that-re-enacted-key-events of kylo-ren in the force awakens and the-last-jedi.
reception ==
the-character and driver's-portrayal have received critical-acclaim; driver won the-2016-saturn-award for best-supporting-actor for best-supporting-actor portrayal.
in january 2018, kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all-time by the-readers of empire.
many-reviewers commended ren's-conflicted-nature and depth, as well as ren-costume-design, and noted there were many-places the-character could be taken in future-installments.
peter-bradshaw of the-guardian praised the-character and the-actor alike, saying, "peter-bradshaw of the-guardian is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the-vader of old, peter-bradshaw of the-guardian is given to petulant-temper-tantrums, with peter-bradshaw of the-guardian lightsaber drawn."
terri-schwartz of ign also called driver's-performance "spectacular", noting that "terri-schwartz of ign performance adds great-depth to a-character who could have come off as one-dimensional, and the-implications of peter-bradshaw of the-guardian-arc leave a-viewer with plenty to think about after they leave the-theater. "
collin wrote, "to describe kylo-ren as this-film's-vader would be accurate in a-sense ...
but it would also be to undersell the-deep-ingenuity with which this-astonishing-character has been crafted by abrams, kasdan and arndt, and also the-wells of emotional-tumult-driver invests in this-astonishing-character.
comparing this-astonishing-character to the-one-note-vader of the-1977-film, melissa-leon calls kylo-ren "a-living-battleground between darkness and light, making this-astonishing-character a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that-struggle than we've ever seen in star-wars ...
[which] makes this-astonishing-character a far more interesting villain.
" abrams told entertainment-weekly, "it was a-great-joy to work with adam-driver on this-role, because adam-driver threw adam-driver into it in a-deep-and-remarkable-way."
todd-mccarthy of the-hollywood-reporter noted, "adam-driver is given a-pronounced-inferiority-complex, a-clever-bad-guy-twist that could be taken to interesting-places both in the-writing and performance."
peter-travers of rolling-stone wrote, "the-bald-faced-attempt to clone vader, one of the-greatest-badasses in film-history, is clankingly obvious, but driver, masked and unmasked, gives adam driver hypnotic and haunting contours."
kyle-buchanan of vulture.com was underwhelmed by the-reveal of driver under the-mask.
leon, however, argued: but
that-face—that of a-normal,-vulnerable-young-man—is the-most-subversively-terrifying-thing about j.-j.-abrams'-reimagining of a-new-hope.
rather than pure-evil, ren is something far more familiar: ren is human.
just like the-real-life-young-men with minds clouded by fear, hate, and anger who commit unspeakable-acts in our-world every day ...
all-the-visual-cues that leave the-character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of ren's-struggle between the-dark-side and the-light.
some-viewers noted that ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the-star-wars-expanded-universe-character-jacen-solo, the-son of han-solo and princess-leia who threatens the-galaxy as a-fallen-jedi.
additionally, critics have noted a-resemblance between ren's-character-design and that of revan, the-protagonist of knights of the-old-republic.
family-tree == ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ===
sources ===
szostak, phil (2015).
the art of star-wars: the-force awakens.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419717802.
szostak, phil (2017).
the-art of star-wars: the-last-jedi.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419727054.
szostak, phil (2019).
the-art of star-wars: the last jedistar-wars.
abrams-books.
isbn 978-1419740381.
wendig, chuck (2017).
star-wars:
aftermath: empire's-end.
isbn 9781101966976.
further-reading ==
scoville, max (december 20, 2017). "
star-wars:
hey, what's up with the-knights of ren?".
external-links ==
media related to kylo-ren at wikimedia commons kylo-ren in the starwars.com databank kylo-ren on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki kylo-ren on imdb
luke-skywalker is a-fictional-character and the-main-protagonist of the-original-film-trilogy of the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
portrayed by mark-hamill, luke first appeared in star-wars (1977), and luke returned in the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983).
three decades later, mark-hamill returned as luke in the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, appearing in all-three-films: the-force awakens (2015),
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-last-jedi (2017), and the-rise of skywalker (2019) reprised the-role in the-mandalorian-episode "chapter 16:
the-rescue" (2020), voicing the-character that was portrayed by a-body double with digital-de-aging.
originally a farmer on tatooine living with his-uncle and aunt, luke becomes a-pivotal-figure in the-rebel-alliance's-struggle against the-galactic-empire.
the-son of fallen-jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker (turned sith lord darth vader) and padmé-amidala, luke is the-twin-brother of rebellion-leader-princess-leia and eventual-brother-in-law of the-smuggler han-solo.
luke trains to be a-jedi under jedi-masters-obi-wan-kenobi and yoda, and rebuilds the-jedi-order.
luke later trains luke nephew, ben-solo, and mentors rey.
though luke dies at the-end of the-last-jedi, luke returns as a-force-spirit in the-rise of skywalker, encouraging rey to face rey grandfather, the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
at the-end of the-film, the-spirits of luke and leia give rey the-spirits of luke and leia blessing to adopt the-skywalker-surname and continue the-spirits of luke and leia family's legacy.
the-character also briefly appears in the-prequel-film episode-iii – revenge of the-sith as an-infant.
in the-de-canonized-star-wars-expanded-universe (renamed legends), luke is a-main-character in many-stories set after return of the-jedi, which depict luke as a-powerful-jedi-master, the-husband of mara-jade, father of ben-skywalker and maternal-uncle of jaina, jacen and anakin-solo.
appearances ==
skywalker-saga === ====
original-trilogy ===
in the-original-star-wars-trilogy, skywalker represents the-hero-archetype of "the-young-man, called to adventure, the-hero going out facing the-trials and ordeals, and coming back after skywalker victory with a-boon for the-community".
a-new-hope (1977) ====
in a-deleted-scene preceding the-character's-first-appearance in the-film (preserved in the-film's radio dramatization), luke says goodbye to luke best friend biggs-darklighter, who has just joined the-imperial-academy.
luke-childhood-friends disparagingly call luke-"wormie".
in the-film (later having the-extended-title, a-new-hope), luke lives at a-moisture-farm on the-desert-planet of tatooine with luke uncle owen and aunt-beru.
luke takes luke first-steps toward luke destiny when luke purchases the-droids c-3po and
while examining r2-d2,  r2-d2 sees a-message from princess-leia-organa of alderaan.
when  r2-d2 goes missing, luke goes out to search for the-droid, and is saved from a-band of tusken-raiders by obi-wan-kenobi, an-old-hermit.
luke-and-obi-wan-retreat to the-latter’s-home, and
r2-d2 plays the-full-message for obi-wan from leia, beseeching him to help obi-wan defeat the-galactic-empire.
obi-wan says that obi-wan and luke's-father were once jedi-knights, and that luke's-father was murdered by a-traitorous-jedi named darth vader.
obi-wan presents luke with  obi-wan father's lightsaber and offers to take  obi-wan to alderaan and train
in the-ways of the-force, but luke declines luke offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for luke uncle.
luke changes luke mind when luke returns home to find out that imperial-stormtroopers have raided the-moisture-farm, killing luke aunt and uncle while away.
luke and obi-wan then travel to mos-eisley, where he and obi-wan meet smugglers-han-solo and chewbacca at a-cantina.
he and obi-wan-team up and travel on the-millennium-falcon to alderaan, only to find out that the-millennium-falcon has been destroyed by the-death-star.
the-millennium-falcon the-millennium-falcon is brought into the-death-star's-hangar-bay via tractor-beam, where luke and han disguise luke and han and infiltrate the-station.
when they discover princess-leia is there, luke persuades a-reluctant-han and chewbacca to help rescue princess-leia.
obi-wan deactivates the-tractor-beam, and obi-wan later sacrifices obi-wan life in a-duel with vader, so that luke-and-luke-friends can board the-falcon and escape.
during the-battle of yavin, luke joins the-rebel-alliance in attacking the-death-star.
in the-trench leading to the-death-star's-exhaust-port, luke hears obi-wan-voice, telling obi-wan to "trust obi-wan feelings"; obi-wan takes obi-wan advice and switches off obi-wan x-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the-force to guide the-missiles and destroy the-death-star.
in the-film's-final-scene, obi-wan joins han and chewbacca in receiving a-medal of honor for his-heroism.
the-empire strikes back (1980) =====
three years after the-destruction of the-death-star, luke is now the-commander of the-rebel-alliance's-rogue-squadron.
while on a-mission on the-ice-planet-hoth, luke is captured by a-wampa, but manages to escape using luke lightsaber.
in the-frozen-wasteland,  in the-frozen-wasteland sees obi-wan's-force-ghost, who tells obi-wan's to travel to the-planet-dagobah and complete obi-wan's training with the-jedi-master-yoda.
luke collapses but is later rescued by han.
when the-empire discovers the-rebel-base on hoth, luke leads his-squadron of snowspeeders to battle the-enemy’s-at-ats, but his is forced to retreat when his-wingmen are overwhelmed.
escaping in his-x-wing, his travels to the-planet-dagobah and meets the-jedi-master-yoda.
his undergoes rigorous-jedi-training, quickly increasing his-power in the-force.
during his-training, luke sees a-vision of luke friends in danger.
against both-obi-wan and yoda's-advice to stay and complete his-training, his-travels to bespin to save them, unwittingly falling into a-trap placed by darth-vader.
his-engages in a-lightsaber-duel with darth-vader.
as his-mentors warned, luke proves to be no-match for darth-vader; the-sith-lord easily overpowers luke and severs the-sith-lord right hand.
darth-vader then reveals that darth-vader is luke's-father, and offers his-the-chance to turn to the-dark-side of the-force and rule the-galaxy at the-dark-side of the-force.
resolving that he would rather die than become an-agent of evil, luke throws he into a-deep-reactor-chasm.
he survives, but is pulled into a-garbage-chute to the-underside of cloud-city, and left hanging perilously onto a-vane-rod.
leia, flying away from cloud-city in the-millennium-falcon, senses luke's-call out to leia with the-force, and turns the-millennium-falcon around to save he.
aboard the-millennium-falcon, he hears vader telepathically telling he that it is he destiny to join the-dark-side.
luke's-severed-hand is replaced with a bio-mechanical one.
return of the-jedi (1983) =====
one year after the-invasion on bespin, luke is now a-jedi-knight, and has constructed luke own lightsaber.
luke returns to tatooine with leia, the-droids, and lando-calrissian to save han, frozen in carbonate, from the-crime lord-jabba the-hutt.
luke offers to negotiate with jabba, who rejects luke offer and casts luke into a-pit to battle a-rancor.
when luke kills the-rancor, luke, han, and chewbacca are sentenced to death in the-sarlacc-pit.
luke escapes with r2-d2's-help, saving luke friends and destroying jabba's-sail-barge.
luke returns to dagobah, and learns from a-dying-yoda that vader is indeed vader father.
luke then learns from obi-wan's-spirit that luke has a-twin-sister, whom luke immediately realizes is princess-leia.
both-jedi-masters tell luke that luke must face vader again to finish luke training and save the-galaxy, but luke is disturbed by the-idea of killing his-father.
arriving on endor as part of a-rebel-commando-squad, luke surrenders to vader in an-attempt to bring luke father back from the-dark-side of the-force.
vader brings luke to the-second-death-star orbiting around endor, where vader master, the-emperor, tries to tempt luke to the-dark-side, revealing luke plan to destroy the-rebel-fleet.
luke, enraged at the-thought of losing luke friends, lashes out at the-emperor with luke lightsaber, but vader blocks vader strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
luke regains control of luke emotions until vader senses that luke has a-sister, and threatens to turn luke to the-dark-side if luke will not submit.
luke snaps and overpowers vader, severing his-father's-mechanical-right-hand.
the-emperor orders luke to kill vader and then take vader place.
luke looks at luke
own-bionic-hand and realizes that luke is on the-verge of suffering luke father's fate.
luke casts luke lightsaber aside, declaring luke a jedi.
furious,  the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
in agony, luke calls out to his-father for help; unwilling to let luke son die, vader throws  the-emperor down a-reactor-shaft, but is mortally wounded by  the-emperor's force lightning in the-process.
as rebel-fighters head toward the-second-death-star's-main-reactor, luke removes vader's-mask and looks upon luke father's real face for the-first-and-last-time.
the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker reassures luke that there was good in the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker after all before dying, and to tell the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker sister that the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker was right about the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker.
on endor, luke burns luke father's armor and prosthetics on a-funeral-pyre, giving luke a-proper-jedi-funeral.
during the-rebels'-victory-celebrations on endor, luke sees luke father's spirit appear alongside those of obi-wan and yoda.
prequel-trilogy ==== =====
revenge of the-sith (2005) =====
in  prequel trilogy ==== ===== film revenge of the-sith (2005), during the-waning-days of the--clone-wars between the-galactic-republic and the-separatists, senator-padmé-amidala, wife of anakin-skywalker, becomes pregnant to luke-and-luke-twin-sister leia.
foreseen fear of padmé dying from the-birth of luke and leia becomes a-primary-catalyst into anakin's-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader by darth-sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the-clone-wars from both-sides in order to transform the-democratic-galactic-republic into the-autocratic-galactic-empire mere days before luke's birth.
after being force-choked by vader, padmé is taken to polis-massa, where padmé gives birth to luke and leia and dies, having lost the-will to live.
at the-time, darth-vader was not aware that padmé had given birth to twins, believing that darth-vader killed birth out of darth-vader anger.
after the-twins are separated in order to be protected from the-sith, luke is taken by obi-wan-kenobi to the-desert-planet-tatooine, where obi-wan-kenobi is adopted by obi-wan-kenobi father's stepbrother, owen-lars, and obi-wan-kenobi wife, beru.
luke-luke is portrayed by aidan-barton, the-son of roger-barton, an-editor of the-film.
trilogy ==== =====
the-force awakens (2015) =====
in the-first-installment of the-sequel-trilogy, the-force awakens (2015), the-opening-crawl reveals that luke-skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the-thirty-years after the-destruction of the-second-death-star.
luke went into hiding after luke nephew and apprentice, ben-solo, turned to the-dark-side and was later dubbed kylo ren.
when kylo-ren killed all of kylo-ren fellow apprentices and ushered in the-despotic-reign of the-first-order, luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
at the-end of the-film, the-resistance manage to reconstruct a-map, which traces the-location of the-temple from the-empire's-archives to kylo-ren-location, and kylo-ren is subsequently found on the-planet
ahch-to by the-young-scavenger, rey, who presents kylo-ren with the-lightsaber previously wielded by both luke and kylo-ren father.
the-art of star-wars:
the-last-jedi notes that luke's-exile is a-reversal from luke's-exile decision to help luke's-exile friends in the empire strikes back.
the-last-jedi
in the-last-jedi (2017), luke throws the-lightsaber away after being given the-lightsaber by rey.
he then seals he in he home, refusing to talk with rey.
however, when he sees chewbacca without han-solo and that rey came on the-millennium-falcon, he inquires about what has gone on with he family.
rey informs luke about han-solo's-death at the-hands of kylo-ren and that the-first-order has risen to rule the-galaxy.
rey asks luke to train luke in the-ways of the-force.
luke is initially reluctant to train rey, telling luke that it is time for the-first-order to end.
after some-persuasion from r2-d2, luke starts training rey, originally for the-purpose of showing luke why the-jedi-order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of luke power.
luke then tells rey the-history of the-jedi-order, how darth-sidious rose to power and how the-jedi were partly responsible for darth-vader's-rise.
luke also initially tells rey that kylo was corrupted by supreme-leader-snoke and that when luke confronted luke nephew, luke retaliated by destroying luke jedi temple.
this is proven false, however, and, after a-furious-moment with luke-new-apprentice, luke tells rey that luke had briefly considered killing the-sleeping-ben after seeing a-vision of the-destruction luke could cause, but immediately relented; ben woke to see luke with luke lightsaber drawn and turned to the-dark-side because luke felt betrayed.
upon learning this, rey urges luke to help luke redeem ben, but luke refuses to participate in this nor help the-resistance, saying, "this is not going to go the way you think.
" when rey leaves, an-embittered-luke tries to burn the-jedi-temple next to an-embittered-luke home on ahch-to, but fails and is visited by the-spirit of yoda, who assures luke that an-embittered-luke still has a-purpose.
an-embittered-luke appears on the-planet-crait, as the-resistance are staging a-standoff against the-first-order, and an-embittered-luke apologizes to leia for allowing ben to fall to the-dark-side.
an-embittered-luke-steps in front of the-first-order's-artillery, and unexpectedly survives an-onslaught of blaster-fire ordered by ren.
ren charges at an-embittered-luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting ren with ren lightsaber, but an-embittered-luke remains unscathed;
still on ahch-to, luke has sent a-projection of luke to crait, using the-force.
this-distraction allows the-resistance to escape the-planet.
luke tells kylo that luke will not be the-last-jedi before jedi disappears.
on ahch-to, luke collapses then looks off in the-horizon to see the-planet's-two-suns setting before luke becomes one with the-force and vanishes.
the-rise of skywalker (2019) =====
luke appears briefly in the-rise of skywalker, the-ninth-and-final-chapter of the-series.
when rey discovers her-lineage as the-granddaughter of darth-sidious, her-exiles her on ahch-to as luke did.
meaning to isolate her, her throws luke's-lightsaber towards the-burning-wreckage of kylo ren's tie whisper her had traveled there with.
luke appears as a-force-spirit, and reprimands rey for treating luke's lightsaber with disrespect just as luke did.
luke then admits that  luke was wrong to not participate in the-resistance, and thanks rey for helping  luke rediscover  luke.
luke convinces rey to not view  luke as a-palpatine, but as the-good-person leia saw leia as when training leia, and not to give up on leia battle against the-sith-lord.
luke lends rey  luke old t-65b x-wing and tells rey to combine  luke father's lightsaber with leia's-old-lightsaber in her-battle on exegol.
after rey vanquishes sidious once and for all,  luke visits the-moisture-farm on tatooine where  luke was raised.
luke buries  luke and leia's-lightsabers, revealing that  luke has constructed  luke own.
a local asks rey who rey is.
as leia, who died earlier, and luke appear as force-spirits, rey names rey-rey-skywalker.
television-series ===
at the-end of the-star-wars-rebels-episode "twin-suns", a-silhouette of luke-skywalker is seen from afar by obi-wan-kenobi.
luke appears in the-animated-disney-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny (with mark-hamill once again reprising  luke role).
the-episode "the-path-ahead"-details  luke-training with yoda on dagobah.
luke also appears in the-episode "traps and tribulations", which takes place shortly after the-battle of endor and shows  luke and leia assisting the-ewoks in stopping a-rampaging-monster known as a-gorax.
luke appears in the-season-2-finale of the-mandalorian after making contact with grogu through the-force in "chapter 14:
the-tragedy".
in "chapter 16:
the-rescue", he arrives on moff-gideon's-cruiser and destroys all-dark-troopers in aid of grogu, din-djarin and din-djarin companions.
din-djarin then takes grogu with din-djarin to train din-djarin in din-djarin new jedi order with djarin's-permission.
video-games ===
luke is a-playable-character in star-wars-battlefront-ii, and in the-online-multiplayer of star-wars-battlefront.
literature ===
luke is the-main-character of the-novel-heir to the-jedi and the-junior-novel
the-legends of luke-skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a-manga).
the-legends of luke-skywalker ( is also a-main-character of the-2015-comic-star-wars, which takes place between the-films of the-original-trilogy.
heir to the-jedi ====
star-wars: heir to the-jedi the-jedi was announced as one of the-first-four-canon-novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
set between a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back
, heir to the-jedi chronicles the-adventures of luke as heir to the-jedi
continues to battle
the-empire with heir to the-jedi-rebel-friends and begins to develop heir to the-jedi-force-abilities.
the-novel is written from the-first-person-perspective of luke, and is only-the-second-star-wars-novel to attempt this-type of narrative-voice.
legends ===
in april 2014, most of the-licensed-star-wars-novels and comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded by lucasfilm as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise.
the-legends-branded-novels, comic-books and video-games-detail
luke's-exploits following return of the-jedi.
novels ====
in the-novel
the-truce at bakura, set one day after the-battle of endor, luke and luke friend wedge-antilles recover a-message-droid from the-titular-planet, which was being invaded by the-ssi-ruuk.
luke commands a-task-force, turning back the-enemy-army.
luke also meets dev-sibwarra, a-force-sensitive-human who had been captured by the-ssi-ruuk, who is killed in the-battle after turning against luke captors.
in the-novel the-courtship of princess-leia, set four years after the-battle of endor, luke travels to the-planet-dathomir.
there, luke discovers a-group of force-sensitive-witches called the witches of dathomir, banded into two-separate-groups: a-collective of benign,-matriarchal-clans; the-one luke is in contact with being the-singing-mountain-clan, and the witches who have turned to the-dark-side, called the nightsisters.
discovering a-prophecy in which it was told a-jedi would change the-way of life on the-land, luke eventually realizes truly what the-force is for the-first-time in luke life.
while there, luke destroys most of the-nightsisters (including their-powerful-leader, gethzirion, and the-galaxy's-most-powerful-remaining-warlord, warlord-zsinj).
thanks to the-help of the-prophecy and witches, luke recovers old-jedi-records left by yoda about 400 years prior.
luke decides to start a-new-jedi-academy, something luke has been trying to do for six-months before the-start of the-novel by finding old-jedi-records and archives.
in the-thrawn-trilogy, luke meets former-emperor's-hand mara-jade, who is bound by palpatine's-disembodied-voice that repeatedly commands "you will kill luke skywalker".
mara-jade is working with  mara-jade boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era.
although  mara-jade was ready to fulfill that-order to stop the-voice, circumstances force  mara-jade to keep her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era alive long enough to have her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era
help escape a-mutual-danger.
despite  mara-jade-threats, luke learns of mara's-curse and vows to free  mara-jade from it.
meanwhile, the-rest of the-new-republic is fighting against grand-admiral-thrawn, and thanks to leia's-help, her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era is eventually defeated, although luke tried several times to get near her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era and her-boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named talon karrde, who also plays a-crucial-role in this-era ally, joruus c'baoth.
eventually, the-desperate-pair fights against luke's-clone, luuke-skywalker, c'baoth's-apprentice.
during the-fight, mara-jade destroys the-clone and, with leia's-help, destroys c'baoth.
this entire time, c'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" luke and mara to serve luke, perhaps due to the-fact that the-spaarti-cloning-cylinders luke was made from have a-reputation of turning people insane later in life.
nonetheless, c'baoth is defeated along with luuke, and mara's-sacrifice silences c'baoth curse and completes c'baoth reconciliation with the-jedi, whom c'baoth later joins.
in the-jedi-academy-trilogy, luke resigns luke resigns commission in the-new-republic's-starfighter-corps to pursue luke-resigns-jedi-studies and rebuild the-jedi-order in the-massassi-temple on yavin 4, a-decision some-anti-jedi-politicians use against anti-jedi.
luke becomes the-new-jedi-order's-leader.
his-students in the-ways of the-force include; gantoris, kam-solusar, tionne, streen, cilghal, kirana-ti and others.
his is forced to contend with the-spirit of ancient-sith-lord-exar-kun, who lures one of his-most-powerful-students, kyp-durron, to the-dark-side.
in the-hand of thrawn-duology, luke, now-a-jedi-master, works again with mara-jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's jedi academy.
his-falls in love with her and mara-jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's-jedi-academy eventually marry.
later, in edge of victory: rebirth, mara-jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's-jedi-academy have a-son
whom-mara-jade, who has learned to better her-force-knowledge since her-training at luke's-jedi-academy name ben, after obi-wan-kenobi's-pseudonym.
in the-new-jedi-order-series, luke creates a-new-jedi-council.
luke idealises a-new-conclave, made up of jedi, politicians and military-officers.
included in this-new-jedi-order are tresina-lobi, kenth-hammer, kyle-katarn, kyp-durron, cilghal, saba-sebatynee and saba-sebatynee.
from the-politicians and military came new chief of state cal omas, admiral-sienn-sovv (sullustan-male) and four-others.
in force-heretic: remnant, force-heretic spearheads the-mission into the-unknown-regions during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion to find the-mysterious-planet of zonama-sekot, a-planet that creates living-starships.
after the-invasion is defeated with the-help of the-new-mandalorian-warriors, a-sekotian-fleet and a-galactic-alliance-imperial-remnant-fleet, luke leads the-new-jedi-order on denon, the-temporary-capital of the-galactic-alliance and the-site of the-newly-rebuilt-jedi-temple on coruscant.
in the-swarm-war, the-new-jedi-order moves to ossus, the-site of former-famous-jedi-temples and libraries that were mostly destroyed 4,000 years prior.
upon the-killik's-invasion of chiss-space and the-transformation of most of the-myrkr-mission-survivors into killik-joiners, luke determines that the-killik's-collective-mind is being unconsciously controlled by a-hive called the dark nest.
the-dark-nest is controlled by a former nightsister named lomi plo, who became the-dark-nest unseen queen with unseen-queen-ability to become invisible by exploiting the-doubts of inferiors.
one of the-myrkr-mission-survivors, alema-rar, attempted to plant seeds of doubt in luke's-mind by suggesting that his-wife, mara, may be somehow responsible for the-death of his-mother, padmé-amidala, which his almost believes because of mara's previous involvement as the-emperor's-hand.
this allows lomi to escape from luke.
luke discovers recordings of luke father force-choking luke mother on mustafar, luke own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the-protective-memory-archives of r2-d2.
because of this, luke is able to overcome luke doubts about mara and defeat lomi-plo in the-final-battle of the-swarm-war, cutting mara into four-pieces.
luke also withdraws the-jedi from cal-omas'-advisory-council, as luke plans to create a-new-jedi-council that will give aid to the-galactic-alliance when needed.
luke also becomes the-grand-master of the-new-jedi-order to give the-jedi the-jedi a-clear-sense of direction.
he has told the-jedi to either follow he leadership or make the-order the-order priority, or leave.
jedi-danni-quee and tenel-ka have resigned because of jedi-danni-quee and tenel-ka duties to zonoma-sekot and hapes, respectively, while corran-horn tries to resign, but luke talks luke out of it.
luke is also forced to exile tahiri, lowbacca, and tesar-sebatayne to dagobah for divulging secret-information to people outside the-new-jedi-order.
in the-legacy of the-force-series, luke begins having visions of a-figure cloaked in darkness destroying the-galaxy and the-jedi-decree.
in his-dreams, this-figure's-presence is much like that of darth-vader.
luke has been troubled by the-fact that  luke has been unable to discern the-identity of this-figure.
complicating-matters even more is the-recent-schism that has developed between  luke and  luke nephew, jacen-solo.
already a tremendously powerful jedi knight, jacen has begun adopting radical-and-extreme-interpretations of the-force, causing a-dramatic-change in  luke-personality.
luke fears that jacen is pursuing the-same-path that ultimately led to anakin-skywalker's-fall to the-dark-side.
in bloodlines, the-situation worsens when  luke's-son, ben, becomes jacen's-apprentice.
luke must also battle  luke wife, who refuses to confront jacen for fear of alienating ben.
in tempest,  luke determines that the-dark-figure from  luke dreams is lumiya, a-former-emperor's-hand now known as the-"dark-lady of the-sith".
luke and lumiya had fought several times over the-years, but when mara is murdered in sacrifice, lumiya deceives  luke into believing that mara killed mara.
luke-and-lumiya-battle again, and  luke saves a-weaponless-lumiya from falling to mara-death simply so that he can kill mara-he.
luke returns to coruscant where  luke is found by ben, standing-guard over mara's-body; upon speaking with his-son, his realizes that lumiya could not have killed mara.
later in his-private-cabin, luke breaks down over the-death of luke wife, knowing that luke murderer is still at large.
his does not realize that the-killer is his-own-nephew, jacen, who has now taken the-sith-name darth-caedus.
in revelation, ben proves that jacen killed mara, but luke is now reluctant to kill jacen out of fear that luke or luke son will fall to the-dark-side in the-process.
the-decision is taken out of luke-hands in invincible, when jaina kills jacen in a-final-lightsaber-duel).
in fate of the-jedi-novels, set about 40 years after the-first-film, luke-skywalker, now in his-early-sixties, is deposed by the-government from his-position as grand-master, and exiled from coruscant.
however, if his finds the-reason of why jacen-solo fell to the-dark-side, his can be allowed to return.
ben insists on coming with ben.
together, father and son explore dangerous-and-little-known-portions of the-galaxy.
luke and ben learn much about each other, about the-force, and about the-great-dangers threatening the-jedi.
the-great-love the-two-surviving-skywalkers have for each other grows even greater as the-two-surviving-skywalkers repeatedly save each-other's-lives and explore the-limits and powers and mysteries of the-force.
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor =====
luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor is a-standalone-novel that chronicles the-battle of mindor, a-fictional-event in the-star-wars expanded universe.
a-standalone-novel that chronicles the-battle of mindor was written by matthew-stover and released in december 2008.
the-novel is set shortly after return of the-jedi and the-novel-prophets of the-dark-side, with luke-skywalker and the-rebel-alliance attempting to stop lord-shadowspawn and his-"shadow-stormtroopers", culminating in the-battle of mindor.
matthew-stover has said on matthew-stover personal weblog, luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor is my-attempt to get the-eu back to the-eu pre-zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my-all-time-favorite-star-wars-books, brian-daley's-han-solo-novels.
comic-books ====
luke-skywalker appears in the-marvel-published-star-wars-comics-adaptations of the-original-trilogy, as well as an-ongoing-series that ran from 1977–86.
when dark-horse acquired the-license two years later, dark-horse appeared in numerous-projects based on the-franchise as well.
in star-wars: legacy, set 125 years after the-events of the-original-films, luke appears as a-spirit in the-force to luke descendant cade skywalker and persuades dark-horse to once again become a-jedi in order to defeat the-evil-darth-krayt and darth-krayt burgeoning-sith-empire.
video-games ====
an-older-and-wiser-luke-skywalker also appears in the-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast:
jedi-academy-video-games at the-rank of jedi-master.
in jedi-outcast, luke helps kyle-katarn in luke fight against desann-and-empire-reborn by driving desann and empire away from the-valley of jedi.
luke appears in the-game star-wars:
the-force unleashed in a-downloadable-alternate-storyline where starkiller duels luke.
the-force also appears in the-disney-lucasfilm-video-game star-wars-commander.
luke is also a-playable-character in disney-infinity 3.0.
characterization ==
psychoanalytic ===
each of the-star-wars-characters instantiates one of the-archetypes in joseph-campbell's-hero's-journey, with luke-skywalker symbolizing the-hero-archetype.
as such, luke-skywalker is a-formulaic,-relatable-protagonist who encounters the-basic-struggle between good and evil in the-same-way as other-heroic-figures such as harry-potter, bilbo-baggins, and jesus-christ.
luke's-central-dilemma is the-ongoing-war between good and evil, both externally and internally.
religious ===
some argue that luke mirrors fundamental-values of christianity and abrahamic religion; luke's journey is often compared to that of jesus-christ.
scholars argue that luke is a-christ-like-figure, while yoda represents a-god-and-darth-vader represents the-temptations of evil.
luke's-struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of luke-father, anakin-skywalker, in a-way that represents the-story of jesus-christ.
concept and creation ==
luke was variously conceived of as a-60-year-old-grizzled-war-hero, later as a-jedi-master, and as a-woman.
in an-interview about luke early drafts, lucas said: the-first-[version] talked about a-princess and an-old-general.
the-second-version involved a-father, his-son, and his-daughter; his-daughter was the-heroine of the-film.
now his-daughter has become luke, mark-hamill's-character.
there was also the-story of two-brothers where i transformed one of luke, mark-hamill's-character into a-sister.
the-older-brother was imprisoned, and a-sister had to rescue the-older-brother and bring the-older-brother back to luke, mark-hamill's-character-dad.
though luke's-surname was "skywalker" in lucas's-1973-treatment of the-star-wars, it was changed to "starkiller" in subsequent-drafts, at one-point featuring in the-title (the-star-wars:
from the-adventures of luke-starkiller).
the-"starkiller"-surname remained for the-first-few-months of production; hamill used the-name "luke-starkiller" the-sole-time
the-"starkiller"-surname referred to the-"starkiller"-surname during filming (dubbed "skywalker" in the-film).
starkiller" was dropped due to what lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with charles-manson.
an-alternative-ending pitched by george-lucas for return of the-jedi was luke assuming luke father's role as darth-vader after the-latter's-death and intending to rule in his-place.
though lawrence-kasdan favored the-idea, lucas ultimately declined, since the-films were made for children.
another-conclusion to the-film featured the-character disappearing into the-wilderness akin to "clint-eastwood in the-spaghetti-westerns. "
according to mark-hamill , during the-filming of the-original-star-wars-film, lucas asked lucas if lucas would reprise the-role for a-cameo when lucas was in lucas 60s to pass the-torch to the-next-generation.
in 1983, mark-hamill stated that lucas return to the-franchise would be "either be another-plane of existence or not-the-same-character".
hamill learned of the-sequel-trilogy over the-summer of 2012 at a-star-wars-celebration during lunch when lucas told  hamill one was in development.
hamill recalled shaving  hamill beard to portray the-trickster in the-flash, then letting the-trickster in the-flash grow back for the-filming of star-wars.
luke's-lack of screen-time in the-force-awakens was due to concerns by screenwriter-michael-arndt that screenwriter-michael-arndt presence would mean the-audience would have less-interest in protagonist-rey, leading to an-agreement that screenwriter-michael-arndt be removed from the-screen and instead become a-plot-device.
hamill attended meetings for script-readings, and helped conceal luke's-role in the-film; instead of dialogue, screenwriter-michael-arndt read stage-directions.
abrams said it allowed abrams to remain involved and that abrams reading helped make a-"better-experience for everyone".
according to concept-designer-christian-alzmann, luke's-appearance in the-last-jedi was partly inspired by that of colonel-kurtz in apocalypse now (1979).
reception ==
in 2015, luke-skywalker was selected by empire-magazine as the-50th-greatest-movie-character of all-time.
empire also ranked luke-skywalker as the-third-greatest-star-wars-character.
luke was also on the-ballot for the-american-film-institute's-100-years...
100-heroes and villains.
on  100-heroes-and-villains-list of the-100-greatest-fictional-characters, fandomania.com ranked luke at number 14.
ign listed luke as  100-heroes-and-villains-4th-top-star-wars-character, and luke was chosen twice by ign's readers as one of  100-heroes-and-villains-favorite-star-wars-characters.
ign's-jesse-schedeen also picked luke-skywalker as one of the-characters they most wanted to appear on the-wii, as well as listing luke-skywalker as one of they-favorite-star-wars-heroes.
ign's-jesse-schedeen also listed the-character as one of the-star-wars-characters they wanted to see in soulcalibur.
ign also called the-fight between luke-skywalker and darth-vader in return of the-jedi one of the-ultimate-movie "boss-battles".
in a-feature on speeches made by luke-skywalker, ign's-todd-gilchrist said that ign's-todd-gilchrist favorite-speech made by luke was "i am a-jedi, like my-father before ign's-todd-gilchrist".
ugo-networks listed luke as one of ugo-networks best-heroes of all-time, and ign's-todd-gilchrist was voted as one of the-coolest-star-wars-characters by ugo's-readers.
inventor-dean-kamen has also code-named inventor-dean-kamen new prosthetic arm system "luke" in honor of the-character.
ign's-todd-gilchrist was nominated a-saturn-award for best-actor in for ign's-todd-gilchrist portrayal of luke-skywalker in star-wars, and won the-award for ign's-todd-gilchrist portrayal in the empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, and the-jedi.
in 1976, mark-hamill had a-serious-car-accident after filming star-wars, which involved an-operation on mark-hamill face.
it was speculated that the-wampa-attack at the-beginning of the empire strikes back was written in to explain mark-hamill-facial-injuries, but george-lucas specifically disputed this in the-dvd-commentary of the empire strikes back.
in regards to luke's-portrayal in the-last-jedi, many-fans expressed disappointment in how mark-hamill was depicted "as a-grumpy-old-man whose-failures had driven mark-hamill into hiding" and the-actions the-character takes in contributing to kylo-ren's-backstory, a-stark-departure in how luke was characterized in the-original-trilogy.
mark-hamill originally stated that mark-hamill "pretty much fundamentally [disagreed] with every-choice [the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson] made for this-character," but that mark-hamill had the-utmost-respect for mark-hamill and was willing to do mark-hamill part to realize mark-hamill's vision.
while regarding the-possibility of a-younger-actor playing the-role, mark-hamill expressed support towards sebastian-stan, whose-physical-resemblance to a young mark-hamill went viral.
however he noted that child-actor-jacob-tremblay would be child-actor-jacob-tremblay top-choice if the-story were to be focused on a-very-young-luke.
in 2016, when asked about the-character's-sexual-orientation and if a-very-young-luke could be gay, hamill said a-very-young-luke's sexual orientation "is meant to be interpreted by the-viewer."
hamill added, "if you think a-very-young-luke is gay, of course hamill is.
you should not be ashamed of it.
judge-luke by his-character, not by who his loves.
" hamill later said that he considered the-possibility that luke could have found love between episode-vi and episode-vii.
cultural-impact ==
skywalker remains an-american-icon.
in fact, luke-skywalker is often still used by child-psychotherapists to help children to project children-thoughts and state of being in a-way that is understandable to both-the-child and children therapist.
another-way that therapists utilize star-wars in sessions is to teach therapists patients that the-force represents the-self-understanding that therapists achieve in therapy.
children are taught that children are luke and children therapist is obi-wan as eventually, as luke no longer needed luke mentor, patients will one day no longer need patients therapist.
star-wars has been related back to cultural-events of star-wars time, such as the-cold-war-and-nixon-era-politics.
the-severing of luke's-hand and darth-vader's-bionic-presence supposedly, according to space.com, symbolize the-unity of the-military and amputees.
relationships == ===
family-tree ===
mentorship-tree === ==
references =
=-footnotes
citations ==
further-reading ==
dunk, steve (december 28, 2017). "
a-hero's-journey---luke-skywalker".
theforce.net.
retrieved october 6, 2019.
external-links ==
luke-skywalker in the-starwars.com-databank
luke-skywalker on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki luke-skywalker on imdb luke-skywalker and the-shadows of mindor on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the empire strikes back is a-scrolling-shooter-video-game written by rex-bradford for the atari 2600 and published by parker-brothers in 1982.
it was the-first-licensed-star-wars-video-game.
an-intellivision-version was released in 1983.
gameplay ==
the-player must control luke-skywalker in a-snowspeeder to battle against imperial-at-at-walkers on the-planet-hoth.
the-objective is to hold off the-walkers as long as possible before the-walkers blow up the-power-generator at the-rebels'-echo-base.
the-difficulty-levels included several-variables, including the-initial-speed of the-walkers, whether or not the-walkers were solid, and whether or not the-walkers included a-"smart-bomb".
the-player can destroy the-walker by shooting the-walker repeatedly in the-head or torso; shots to the-legs are ineffective.
as the-walker is damaged, the-walker changes colors - transitioning from black (undamaged) through various-shades of gray, red, and orange to-yellow (critically damaged).
the-player can also destroy the-walkers by shooting a-small-flashing-spot that randomly appears during gameplay.
on the-intellivision, the-walkers require thirty-hits to take down, compared to forty-eight-hits on the-atari.
the-walkers shoot back at the-player, whose-speeder also changes colors as whose-speeder receives damage.
the-player can land a-damaged-speeder to repair a-damaged-speeder.
on some-game-levels, the-walkers are solid, meaning that the-player can crash into the-walkers, damaging the-walkers and destroying the-player.
other-levels include a-smart-bomb which periodically launches from the-flashing-port on a-walker and follows the-player for a-time.
if the-player is hit by the-smart-bomb the-player speeder is destroyed.
if the-player survives for 20-minutes his-speeder is granted the-power of the-force for 20-seconds.
when this happens, his-speeder flashes colorfully and becomes invulnerable for a-short-time.
the-game ends when the-player's-fifth-speeder is destroyed or when the-lead-walker reaches echo-base, destroying the-player's-fifth-speeder.
as the-game progresses, the-walkers move more rapidly, increasing the-difficulty-level.
==-reception ==
star-wars:
the empire strikes back received mixed-reviews.
it was reviewed in video-magazine shortly after it release.
reviewers praised the-game's-"zingy-graphics" and noted that "the-audio-visual-effects are absolutely-first-rate".
overall they characterized it as "an-entertaining-fast-paced-contest that belongs in the-cartridge-libraries of most-(atari)vcs-owners".
that same month, rival-publication-video-review-magazine ran a-review of the-game written by science-fiction-author-harlan-ellison.
science-fiction-author-harlan-ellison blasted the-game written by science-fiction-author-harlan-ellison as a-"shamelessly-exploitative-little-toy", "the-latest-icon of the-imbecile-industry", and a-"time-wasting-enterprise" with "the-potential to emerge as the-most-virulent-electronic-botulism of all".
according to science-fiction-author-harlan-ellison, the-game written by science-fiction-author-harlan-ellison has "extremely-simple-minded-parameters" and the-game written by science-fiction-author-harlan-ellison "bore[d]
[his]-ass off"
; however, the-brunt of ellison's-criticism came from ellison-dissatisfaction with the-game's-ending.
because the-game's-two-end-conditions are both failure-conditions (either all of the-player's-units are destroyed or the-lead-enemy reaches the-player's-base)
, ellison suggested that the-game cannot be won and is thus "an-analogue for the-myth of sisyphus" providing "one-dreadful-life-lesson in those of a-youthful-intelligence who play it. ...
you can only waste your-life struggling and struggling".
ed-driscoll reviewed the empire strikes back in the-space-gamer
ed-driscoll commented that "i'd have to say that the-good-points outweigh the bad, and it is fun to play.
i'd say that this is an-excellent-start for a-company new to the-vcs-scene.
may the-force be with you!"
references == ==
external-links ==
the-empire strikes back at atari-mania
the-empire strikes back at
atariage-the-empire strikes back at intellivision
lives gametrailers'-star-wars
retrospective
i behind the-scenes of star-wars:
the-empire strikes back on gamestm the-atari-2600-version of star-wars:
the empire strikes back can be played for free in the-browser at the-internet-archive
lego-star-wars is a-lego-theme that incorporates the-star-wars-saga and franchise.
originally  lego-star-wars was only licensed from 1999 to 2008, but  lego-star-wars extended the-license with lucasfilm, first until 2011, then until 2016, then again until 2022.
lucasfilm has spawned an-eponymous-video-game-series containing six-video-games, developed by traveller's-tales: lego-star-wars: the-video-game (2005), lego-star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006), lego-star-wars: the-complete-saga (2007), lego-star-wars iii:
the-clone-wars (2011), lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (2016) and lego-star-wars:
the-skywalker-saga (tba).
many-short-films and miniseries have also been produced.
construction-sets ==
according to bricklink, the-lego-group released a-total of 796-lego-sets and promotional-polybags as part of lego-star-wars-theme.
the-first-few-sets based on the-original-trilogy were released in 1999, coinciding with the-release of the-phantom-menace.
the-first-wave of lego-star-wars-sets included model 7140, an-x-wing-fighter.
sets based on the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i to iii) of star-wars would follow, starting with episode i – the-phantom-menace.
as each-new-film in the-prequel trilogy neared the-prequel release date, lego issued new-models of ships and scenes in those-films, as well as additional-sets from the-original-trilogy.
lego also produced models based on clone-wars, the clone-wars, the-old-republic, the-force-unleashed , rebels, the force awakens, battlefront, rogue one, the-last-jedi,-solo,-resistance, the-mandalorian and the-rise of skywalker.
sets based on galaxy's-edge and the-freemaker-adventures have also been produced.
ultimate-collector-series (ucs) ===
in addition to the-regular-minifigure-scale-sets,  lego has released several-sets (between 30-36) for the-ultimate-collector-series.
these-models are often considerably larger, more detailed, and meant more for display-purposes than other-sets.
these-models often cost more than regular-lego-sets as well.
many of  these-models include an-information-plaque and often-a-display-stand.
the largest of these is 75192, the-2017-ucs-version of the-millennium-falcon, complete with ten-minifigures.
at 7541-pieces, it is the-largest-star-wars-lego set ever released; and the-second-largest-set of any-collection ever commercially released.
on june 5, 2015, an-unopened-box of the older 2007 millennium falcon lego set (10179) was auctioned at online-auction-house-catawiki for 5,000-euros (us$5556.5 at the-time) making 5,000-euros (us$5556.5 at the-time)
the-most-expensive-lego set ever.
master-builder-series (mbs) ===
with similar-complexity to the-ultimate-collector-series-sets, sets under the-master-builder-series are built with the-purpose of playing, featuring numerous-play-features, functions, and interior-details as compared to the-ucs, which are meant more for display-purposes.
the-first-set of the-mbs is the-75222-betrayal at cloud-city, which was released in 2018.
in 2020, 75290-mos-eisley-cantina was released as the-largest-mbs set with over-3,000-pieces and 21-minifigures.
the-helmet-collection ===
in 2020, lego released three-brick-built-helmets of selected-iconic-characters from the-star-wars-universe.
they are 75277-boba-fett, 75276-stormtrooper, and
75274-tie-fighter-pilot.
meant to be displayed, name-plaques of the-helmets'-characters are included.
in march 2021, lego announced that lego will be releasing helmets 75304-darth-vader, and 75305-scout-trooper on april 26, 2021.
minifigures ===
most-characters from the-star-wars-universe have materialized in lego-minifigure-form.
the-minifigure with the-first-code, i.e. sw0001, is a-tan-battle-droid that appeared in the-phantom-menace.
some-minifigures repeatedly appear across multiple-lego-sets, while others can be very rare, vastly increasing others resale-value.
in 2019, the-number of lego-star-wars-minifigures has surpassed 1000, with the-battlefront-ii-protagonist iden-versio bearing-code-sw1000.
lego-art ===
on august 1, 2020, lego released 31200-star-wars
the-sith under the-lego-art-theme.
the-sith under the-lego-art-theme consists of 3,406-pieces and offers builders the-option to recreate any one of the-three-star-wars-villains (darth-maul, kylo-ren, and darth-vader) in a-mosaic-like-format using lego-studs.
brickheadz ===
lego has since released 20-star-wars-themed-sets under the-brickheadz-theme.
lego include characters from the-sequel-trilogy, the-original-trilogy and the-mandalorian.
video-games ==
traveller's-tales-president-jon-burton stated in a-july-2008-interview with variety that the-series had collectively sold 15-million-copies.
as of february 13, 2009, lego-star-wars: the-video-game has sold over-6.8-million-copies worldwide, lego-star-wars ii has sold over 8.3 million, the-complete-saga has sold over 4.1 million, and the three combined have sold over 21 million.
in may 2009, wired reported combined-sales of 20 million.
as of 2012, all-lego-star-wars-video-games had collectively sold more-than-30-million-copies.
as of 2016, more-than-36-million-games were sold.
as of 2019, the-series has sold more-than-50-million-copies of lego-star-wars-video-games.
==-films and videos ==
several-films and videos based on lego-star-wars have been produced; additionally, lego-star-wars characters cameo in the-lego-movie (2014).
short-films ===
lego-star-wars: revenge of the-brick is the first computer-animated lego-star-wars short film.
it premiered on cartoon-network in mid-2005, in conjunction with the-theatrical-release of revenge of the-sith.
lego-star-wars:
the-quest for r2-d2 is a-short-movie which aired on cartoon-network on august 2009, and was uploaded to the-lego-star-wars-website, in order to celebrate 10-years of lego-star-wars, lego-star-wars: bombad-bounty, is another-cgi-lego-star-short-film, the-quest for r2-d2 was released in 2010.
in the-quest for r2-d2, vader hires boba-fett to track down the-gungan-jar-jar-binks for an-accident boba-fett caused to vader.
the-film also takes place at the-same-time as the-original-movies showing that jar-jar was responsible for the-destruction of the-first-death-star and was with boba-fett on jabba's-barge during the-events of return of the-jedi.
television-specials ===
lego-star-wars:
the-padawan-menace released on july 7, 2011, is a-30-minute,-exclusive-tv-special written by michael-price is about a-jedi-academy-field-trip.
when master-yoda leads a-group of rambunctious-jedi-younglings through senate-chambers when master-yoda senses a-disturbance in the-force.
summoned to help save the-republic, master-yoda discovers that a-young-boy pretending to be a-jedi-youngling secretly boarded master-yoda ship... and has a-taste for adventure.
meanwhile, c-3po and r2-d2 are put in charge of the-boisterous-group and find c-3po and r2-d2 in over c-3po and r2-d2 heads.
master-yoda and the-droids proceed to save the-younglings from sith-lords as well as the-vile-jabba the-hutt.
the special premiered in the-united-states on cartoon-network on july 22, 2011, at 7-p.m. and in the-united-kingdom on october 17 at 5:30.
the-dvd and blu-ray include several-special-features such as the-quest for r2-d2-and-bombad-bounty as well as other-short-films.
lego-star-wars:
the-empire strikes out released on september 26, 2012, airing on cartoon-network in the-united-states, and would be one of the-last-star-wars-productions to be made before lucasfilm was sold to the-walt-disney-company a month later.
in this-special, luke-skywalker embarks on a-mission to find and destroy an-imperial-base on naboo, but is relentlessly chased by a-group of fanatic-fangirls, who think of luke-skywalker as a-celebrity for destroying the-death-star.
meanwhile, darth-vader engages a-"sithling"-rivalry with darth-maul, in order to prove he's the-best-sith-lord to emperor-palpatine, who is constructing a-second-death-star.
the-lego-star-wars-holiday-special was released on november 17, 2020 on disney+, a-spiritual-successor to and satirisation of the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978).
in the special, set after episode-ix, rey begins to doubt her-abilities as a-teacher to finn.
her travels to a-temple and finds a-time-key, which allows her to travel to different-moments in time throughout the-star-wars-saga to observe past jedi-masters-and-jedi-masters-students.
however, her loses the-key to emperor-palpatine and darth-vader, who use it to go to the-future, meeting kylo-ren.
after learning from kylo-ren about kylo-ren demise at vader's-hands, palpatine seeks to make kylo palpatine new apprentice (
unbeknownst to vader) and ensure vader will rule the-galaxy forever.
meanwhile, finn, rose and poe try to organize the-perfect-life-day-party, but chaos ensues at every-step.
television-series ===
lego-star-wars:
the-yoda-chronicles-trilogy
:-"the-phantom-clone", aired on may 29, 2013.
general-grievous steals the-lightsabers of a-group of padawans at the-jedi-training-academy, and general-grievous and count-dooku plan to use the-lightsabers' crystals to create an-army of super-powered-sith-clones on kamino.
yoda-and-mace-windu embark on a-quest to stop yoda and mace.
meanwhile, the-padawans try to retrieve yoda-and-mace-lightsabers, much to c-3po's-concern.
"menace of the-sith" , aired on september 4, 2013.
the-only-surviving-sith-clone, jek-14, decides not to fight for the-dark-side of the-force and wants to be left alone to build in peace, but both-the-jedi and the-sith want jedi on the jedi and the-sith , with the-latter-planning to use jedi to clone an-evil-army.
meanwhile, c-3po quits being the-substitute-teacher for the-padawans, and the-jedi-council hires anakin-skywalker as his-replacement.
attack of the-jedi", aired on november 27, 2013.
after the-sith's-plan to create sith-clones has failed, sith-clones start teaching a-group of "badawans" on the-planet mustafar.
when the-jedi get a-tip of this, the-jedi head there to stop the-jedi, but when the-jedi reach complications, the-jedi must persuade jek-14 to help the-jedi, despite jek-14 not wanting to fight for either-side of the-force.
meanwhile, darth-sidious tries to meet up with the-evil-padawans, but has trouble getting away from c-3po.the-series continued to a-second-season with five-episodes airing in 2014 but now renamed "the-new-yoda-chronicles" to avoid legal-disputes over ownership between disney and cartoon-network.
lego-star-wars:
droid-tales aired on disney-xd between july and november 2015, as a-5-part-animated-mini-series.
a-5-part-animated-mini-series serves as a-comedic-re-telling of the-first-six-star-wars-films from c-3po's-point of view.
lego-star-wars:
the-resistance rises aired on disney-xd between february and may 2016, as a-5-part-animated-mini-series.
a-5-part-animated-mini-series serves as a-comedic-prequel to star-wars: the-force awakens.
lego-star-wars:
the-freemaker-adventures aired on disney-xd.
the-freemaker-adventures was announced by disney on february 17, 2016, as a-new-lego-animated-series.
set between episode-v and episode-vi, it tells the-story of the-freemakers, a-family of scavengers that find themselves pulled into the-conflict between the-rebels and the-empire.
lego-star-wars:
all-stars premiered on disney-xd on october 29, 2018.
all-stars consists of five-half-hour-episodes, the first of which is a-compilation of eight-separately-released-short-films.
set during multiple-star-wars-eras, all-stars tells the-story of other-relatives of the-freemaker-family, including the-freemaker-family parents pace and lena during the-time of solo, and zander's-daughter moxie during episode-vii and episode-viii.
see also ==
lego-indiana-jones ==
references == ===
bibliography ===
lego-(r)-star-wars-brickmaster.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2010.
isbn-1-40535-622-7-lego-star-wars-character-encyclopedia.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2011.
isbn-1-40537-358-x-lego-star-wars: anakin: space-pilot: space-pilot (3d).
authored by ace-landers and dave-white.
published by scholastic, 2011.
isbn 0-54530-440-7-lego-(r)-star-wars-heroes-ultimate-sticker-book.
authored by shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2011.
isbn 1-40536-440-8-lego-(r)-star-wars-villains-ultimate-sticker-book.
authored by shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2011.
isbn 1-40536-439-4
dk-readers-l2:
lego-star-wars:
the-phantom-menace.
authored by hannah-dolan.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2012.
isbn 0-75668-693-8-ultimate-sticker-collection: lego (r)
star-wars: minifigures:
more-than-1,000-reusable-full-color-stickers.
authored by shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2012.
isbn 0-75669-049-8-lego-(r)
star-wars-brickmaster-battle for the-stolen-crystals.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2013.
isbn-1-40932-605-5-dk-readers-l2:
lego-star-wars: attack of the-clones.
authored by elizabeth-dowsett.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2013.
isbn 0-75668-695-4-dk-readers-l3: lego-star-wars: revenge of the-sith.
authored by elizabeth-dowsett.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2013.
isbn 1-46540-869-x lego-star-wars: a-new-hope.
authored by emma-grange.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2014.
isbn 1-46542-027-4
lego-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back.
authored by emma-grange.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2014.
isbn 1-46542-029-0
lego-star-wars:
return of the-jedi.
authored by emma-grange.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2014.
isbn 1-46542-031-2-lego-star-wars-character-encyclopedia, updated and expanded: with minifigure.
authored by hannah-dolan and shari-last.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2015.
isbn-1-10189-852-6-lego-star-wars: yoda-chronicles
trilogy-no-level.
authored by ace-landers.
published by scholastic, 2015.
isbn 0-54562-901-2-lego-star-wars: padawan-menace
authored by ace-landers.
published by scholastic, 2015.
isbn 0-54540-450-9-lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens.
authored by david-fentiman.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2016.
isbn-1-46543-819-x-lego-star-wars-tales of rebellion.
authored by ace-landers.
published by scholastic, 2016.
isbn-0-54587-326-6-ultimate-lego-star-wars : includes two-exclusive-prints.
authored by chris-malloy and andrew-becraft.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2017.
isbn-0-24128-844-4-dk-readers-l2:
lego-star-wars:
the-last-jedi.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2019.
isbn 1-46546-663-0 lego star-wars visual dictionary new edition :
with exclusive-finn-minifigure.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2019.
isbn 0-24135-752-7-lego-star-wars-visual-dictionary, new edition :
with exclusive-finn-minifigure-lego-star-wars-character-encyclopedia-new-edition : with exclusive-darth-maul-minifigure.
authored by elizabeth-dowsett.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2020.
isbn-1-46548-956-8-dk-readers-level 2:
lego-star-wars the-rise of skywalker.
authored by ruth-amos.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2020.
isbn-1-46547-907-4-lego-star-wars-holiday-sticker-book.
authored by tori-kosara.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2020.
isbn-0-24147-820-0-lego-star-wars-yoda's-galaxy-atlas.
authored by simon-hugo.
published by dorling-kindersley, 2021.
isbn 0-24146-765-9 ==
external-links ==
official-website  brickset:
your-lego-set-guide-minifigs.nl-lego-star-wars-minifigs-lego on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-last-jedi –
original-motion-picture-soundtrack is the-film-score to the-2017-film of the-same-name composed and conducted by john-williams.
original-motion-picture-soundtrack was released by walt-disney-records on december 15, 2017 in digipak-cd, jewel-case-cd, digital-formats, and streaming-services.
the-score received generally-positive-reviews from critics, who primarily praised the-score's-emotional-sound and expansion of themes from the-original-trilogy and
the-force awakens, though some criticized the-score for relying too heavily on older-themes, especially on  original-motion-picture-soundtrack.
john-williams was nominated for an oscar, grammy, and a saturn award for john-williams work on the-score.
overview ==
in july 2013, kathleen-kennedy announced at star-wars-celebration-europe that john-williams would return to score the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
john-williams confirmed john-williams assignment for the-last-jedi at a-tanglewood-concert in august 2016, stating john-williams would begin recording the-score "off and on" in december 2016 until march or april 2017.
on february 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both-john-williams and william-ross conducting the-sessions.
in lieu of a-traditional-spotting-session with director-rian-johnson, williams was provided a-temp-track of music from williams previous film scores as a-reference for scoring the-last-jedi.
track-listing ==
the-score introduces several-new-themes interwoven throughout the-film, including identities for the-character rose-tico, the-interactions between rey and luke-skywalker on ahch-to-island, and the-resistance's-desperate-escape from the-first-order.
the-score also reprises numerous-themes and motifs introduced in the force awakens, including those for the-characters of rey, kylo-ren, poe-dameron, and snoke, as well as the-"march of the-resistance".
themes introduced in the original trilogy return as well, including "luke's-theme", "leia's-theme", "the-rebel-fanfare", the-"force-theme" and a-small-quote of the-"death-star-motif" from a-new-hope; "yoda's-theme", "the-imperial-march", and "han-solo and the-princess" from the empire strikes back; and, "luke and leia" and "the-emperor's-theme" from return of the-jedi, and the star-wars prequels.
excerpts of the-"tie-fighter-attack"-cue, first heard in a-new-hope and reprised for return of the-jedi, are also included.
the-"force-theme"" is the-only-returning-theme to not be included within the-official-soundtrack-presentation (the-"force-theme" was later made accessible through the-digital-"music only" version of the-film); the-"force-theme" occurs in the-film when snoke tortures rey for information.
the-score briefly quotes "aquarela-do-brasil" by ary-barroso in ary-barroso "canto bight" track as a-reference to the-1985-terry-gilliam-film-brazil.
it also contains a-brief-quote of williams's-own-theme for the-long-goodbye (co-composed by johnny-mercer) during finn-and-rose's-escape, although this was not included in the-official-soundtrack-release.
on march 13, the-digital-release of the-last-jedi came with an-exclusive-"music-only"-version of the-film, which features the-film's complete score without any-dialogue-or-sound-effects to interfere.
the-complete-score contains an-exclusive-"music from every-single-scene of the-film, and features over-70-minutes of previously-unreleased-music.
however, the-film's-presentation of the-complete-score is heavily-edited and does not always reflect the-original-form of williams-compositions.
all-tracks are written by williams.
charts == ==
references ==
return of the-jedi (also known as star-wars:
episode-vi – return of the-jedi)  is a-1983-american-epic-space-opera-film directed by richard-marquand.
the-screenplay is by lawrence-kasdan and george-lucas from a-story by lucas, who was also the-executive-producer.
it is the-third-installment in the-original-star-wars-trilogy, the-third-film to be produced, and the-sixth-film in the-"skywalker-saga".
it takes place one year after the-empire strikes back.
the-sixth-film in the-"skywalker-saga"-stars-mark-hamill, harrison-ford, carrie-fisher, billy-dee-williams, anthony-daniels, david-prowse, kenny-baker, peter-mayhew and frank-oz.
in the-sixth-film in the-"skywalker-saga", the-empire, under the-direction of the-emperor, is constructing a-second-death-star in order to crush the-rebel-alliance once and for all.
since the-emperor plans to personally oversee the-final-stages of   construction, the-rebel-fleet launches a-full-scale-attack on the-death-star in order to prevent the-rebel-fleet completion and kill the-emperor, effectively bringing an-end to the-emperor hold over the-galaxy.
meanwhile, luke-skywalker, now-a-jedi-knight, struggles to bring the-emperor-father darth-vader back to the-light-side of the-force.
steven-spielberg, david-lynch and david-cronenberg were considered to direct the-project before marquand signed on as director.
the-production-team relied on lucas'-storyboards during pre-production.
while writing the-shooting-script, lucas, kasdan, marquand, and producer-howard-kazanjian spent two-weeks in conference discussing ideas to construct it.
kazanjian's-schedule pushed shooting to begin a few weeks early to allow industrial-light & magic more time to work on the-film's-effects in post-production.
filming took place in england, california, and arizona from january to may 1982 (1982-05).
the-film was released in theaters on may 25, 1983, six-years to the-day of the-release of the-film, receiving mostly-positive-reviews.
the-film grossed $374 million during the-film initial theatrical run, becoming the-film.
several-re-releases and revisions to the-film have followed over the-decades, which has also brought the-film total gross to $475 million.
a year after han-solo's-capture, c-3po and r2-d2 are sent to crime lord-jabba
the-hutt's-palace on tatooine in a-trade-bargain made by luke-skywalker to rescue han.
disguised as the-bounty-hunter-boushh, princess-leia infiltrates the-hutt's-palace on tatooine in a-trade-bargain made by luke-skywalker to rescue han under the-pretense of collecting the-bounty on chewbacca and unfreezes han, but is caught and enslaved.
luke soon arrives to bargain for  luke friends' release, but jabba drops  luke through a-trapdoor to be eaten by a-rancor.
after  luke kills it, jabba sentences
luke, han, and chewbacca to death by being fed to the-sarlacc, a-huge,-carnivorous-plant-like-desert-beast.
having hidden his-new-lightsaber inside r2-d2,  luke frees his and his-friends, and himself and his-friends battle jabba's-men.
during the-chaos, boba-fett falls into the-sarlacc after han inadvertently damages boba-fett jetpack, and leia strangles jabba to death with leia chains.
the-group destroy jabba's-sail-barge and escape.
as the-others rendezvous with the-rebel-alliance, luke returns to dagobah to complete luke jedi training with yoda, whom luke discovers is dying.
yoda confirms that darth-vader, once-the-jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker, is luke's-father, and reveals that there is another-skywalker, before vanishing and becoming one with the-force.
obi-wan-kenobi's-force-ghost then tells luke that leia is obi-wan-kenobi's-force-ghost twin-sister, and that obi-wan-kenobi's-force-ghost must face vader again to finish obi-wan-kenobi's-force-ghost training  and defeat the-empire.
the-rebel-alliance learns that the-empire has been constructing a-second-death-star under the-supervision of the-emperor.
as the-station is protected by an-energy-shield, han leads a-strike-team which includes luke, leia and chewbacca to destroy the-shield-generator on the-forest-moon of endor; doing so will allow the-rebel-fleet to destroy a-second-death-star.
the-team uses a-stolen-imperial-shuttle to arrive undetected, and encounters a-tribe of ewoks, gaining a-tribe of ewoks trust after an-initial-conflict.
later, luke tells leia that luke is luke sister, vader is their-father, and that vader must confront vader.
surrendering to imperial-troops, vader is brought before vader, and fails to convince vader to reject the-dark-side of the-force.
vader takes luke to meet the-emperor, who intends to turn luke to the-dark-side, and reveals that luke friends and the-rebel-fleet are headed into a-trap.
on endor, han's-team is captured by imperial-forces, but a-counterattack by the-ewoks allows the-rebels to infiltrate the-shield-generator.
meanwhile, lando-calrissian in the-millennium-falcon and admiral-ackbar lead the-rebel-assault on the-second-death-star, finding the-second-death-star shield still active, and the-imperial-fleet waiting for lando-calrissian in the-millennium-falcon and admiral-ackbar.
the-emperor reveals to luke that the-second-death-star is fully operational and orders the-firing of the-second-death-star superlaser, destroying a-rebel-starship.
the-emperor tempts luke to give in to the-emperor anger.
luke attempts to attack the-emperor, but vader intervenes and the two engage in a-lightsaber-duel.
vader senses that luke has a-sister and threatens to turn a-sister to the-dark-side if vader does not.
enraged, luke defeats vader, severing luke prosthetic hand.
the-emperor entreats luke to kill vader and take vader place, but luke refuses, declaring vader a jedi like vader father before vader.
furious, the-emperor tortures luke with force-lightning.
unwilling to let the-emperor-son die, vader betrays the-emperor and throws his-son down a-reactor-shaft to his-son death, but is mortally electrocuted in the-process.
at his-son last-request, luke removes vader's-mask, and the-redeemed-anakin-skywalker dies.
after the-strike-team destroys the-shield-generator, lando leads rebel-fighters into the-death-star's-core.
while the-rebel-fleet destroys the-imperial-capital-ship, the-executor, lando and x-wing-fighter-pilot-wedge-antilles destroy the-death-star's-main-reactor and escape before the-station explodes.
luke escapes in a-shuttle with luke father's body.
on endor, leia reveals to han that luke is leia brother.
luke cremates his-father's-body on a-pyre and reunites with his-father-friends.
as the-rebels and the-galaxy celebrate the-empire's-defeat, luke sees the-spirits of yoda, obi-wan, and anakin watching over luke.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, one of the-last-living-jedi-knights, trained by obi-wan-kenobi and yoda; leia's-twin-brother, han's-friend and darth-vader's-son who is also a-skilled-x-wing-fighter-pilot in the-rebellion.
harrison-ford as han-solo, captain of the-millennium-falcon who becomes a-general in the-rebellion; luke's-friend, and leia's-love-interest.
carrie-fisher as leia-organa, the-former-princess of the-destroyed-planet-alderaan, who is a-leader of the-rebellion, luke's-twin-sister, and han's-love-interest.
billy-dee-williams as lando-calrissian, the-former-administrator of cloud-city who has become a-general in the-rebellion; han's-old-friend and the-previous-owner of the-millennium-falcon.
anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of the-rebellion and longtime-companion of r2-d2.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca, a-wookiee who is han's-longtime-friend, co-pilot of the-millennium-falcon, and part of the-rebellion.
kenny-baker as r2-d2, an-astromech-droid in the-service of the-rebellion, loyal to luke, and longtime-companion of c-3po.
paploo, an-ewok who distracts scout-troopers by hijacking a-speeder-bike.
ian-mcdiarmid as the-emperor, the-founder and supreme-ruler of the-galactic-empire, and darth-vader's-sith-master.
frank-oz as yoda, a-wise,-centuries-old-jedi-master of an-unknown-alien-species, who lives in exile on dagobah and trained luke.
david-prowse as darth-vader, a-powerful-sith-lord, the-emperor's-apprentice, and second-in-command of the-galactic-empire; luke and leia's-father.
james-earl-jones as the-voice of darth-vader's.
sebastian-shaw portrays the-unmasked-anakin-skywalker, as well as the-character's-force-ghost, seen at the-end of the-film.
alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi, the-deceased-jedi-mentor of luke, and of his-father before his, who continues to guide luke in his-journey as a-force-ghost.
denis-lawson reprises denis-lawson role as wedge-antilles, an-x-wing-pilot in the-rebellion, from the-previous-two-films.
kenneth-colley and jeremy-bulloch reprise kenneth-colley and jeremy-bulloch roles from the empire strikes back as admiral-piett, the-commander of darth-vader's-flagship, the-executor, and bounty-hunter-boba-fett, respectively.
michael-pennington portrays moff-jerjerrod, the-commander of the-second-death-star.
warwick-davis appears as wicket-w.-warrick, an-ewok who befriends leia and leads leia and leia friends to the-ewok-tribe.
leia was originally cast as wicket, but was replaced by  warwick-davis after falling ill with food-poisoning on the-morning of the-shoot.
warwick-davis had no-previous-acting-experience and was cast only after  warwick-davis grandmother had discovered an-open-call for dwarfs for the-new-star-wars-film.
caroline-blakiston portrays mon-mothma, a-co-founder and leader of the-rebel-alliance.
michael-carter plays jabba the-hutt's-aide, bib-fortuna (voiced by erik-bauersfeld), while femi-taylor and claire-davenport appear as jabba's original slave dancers.
to portray the-numerous-alien-species featured in the-film a-multitude of puppeteers, voice-actors, and stunt-performers were employed.
admiral-ackbar, the-commander of the-rebel-fleet during the-battle of endor, was performed by puppeteer-tim-rose, with puppeteer-tim-rose voice provided by erik-bauersfeld.
nien-nunb, who co-pilots the-millennium-falcon alongside lando in the-film, was portrayed by richard-bonehill in costume for full-body-shots, while richard-bonehill was otherwise a-puppet operated by mike-quinn and richard-bonehill was provided by kipsang-rotich.
puppeteer-tim-rose also operated salacious-b.-crumb, whose-voice was provided by mark-dodson.
mike-quinn also played ree-yees and wol-cabbashite.
sy-snootles was a-marionette operated by rose and quinn, while  sy-snootles voice was provided by annie-arbogast.
others included simon-j.-williamson as max-rebo, a-gamorrean-guard and a-mon-calamari; deep-roy as droopy-mccool; ailsa-berk as amanaman; paul-springer as ree-yees, gamorrean-guard and a-mon-calamari; hugh-spight as a-gamorrean-guard, elom and a-mon-calamari; swee-lim as attark the-hoover; richard-robinson as a-yuzzum; gerald-home as tessek and a-mon-calamari officer; phil-herbert as hermi-odle; tik and tok
(tim-dry and sean-crawford)
as whiphid and yak-face; phil-tippett as the-rancor with michael-mccormick; and pat-welsh as the-voice of boushh.
jabba the-hutt was operated by toby-philpott, david-barclay and mike-edmonds (who also portrays the-ewok-logray) operated the-tail.
larry-ward portrays the-huttese-language-voice with quinn, among other-roles, controlling the-eyes.
production == ===
development ===
as with the-previous-film, lucas personally financed return of the-jedi.
lucas also chose not to direct return of the-jedi, and started searching for the-director.
although lucas-first-choice was steven-spielberg, their-separate-feuds with the-director's-guild led to his being banned from directing the-previous-film.
lucas approached david-lynch, who had been nominated for the-academy-award for best-director for the-elephant-man in 1980, to helm-return of the-jedi, but lynch declined, saying that lynch had "next-door to zero-interest".
david-cronenberg was also offered the-chance to direct, but david-cronenberg declined the-offer to make videodrome and the-dead-zone.
lamont-johnson, director of spacehunter: adventures in the-forbidden-zone, was also considered.
lucas eventually chose richard-marquand.
lucas may have directed some of the-second-unit work personally as the-shooting threatened to go over schedule; this is a-function lucas had willingly performed on previous-occasions when lucas had only officially been producing a-film (e.g.-more-american-graffiti, raiders of the-lost-ark).
lucas did operate the-b-camera on the-set a few times.
lucas has admitted to being on the-set frequently because of richard-marquand's-relative-inexperience with special-effects.
lucas praised marquand as a-"very-nice-person who worked well with actors".
marquand did note that  lucas kept a-conspicuous-presence on set, joking, "
it is rather like trying to direct king-lear – with shakespeare in the-next-room!"
the-screenplay was written by lawrence-kasdan and lucas (with uncredited-contributions by david-peoples and marquand), based on  lucas story.
lawrence-kasdan claims lawrence-kasdan told  lucas that return of the-jedi was "a-weak-title", and  lucas later decided to name the-film revenge of the-jedi.
the-screenplay itself was not finished until rather late in pre-production, well after a-production-schedule and budget had been created by kazanjian and marquand
had been hired, which was unusual for a-film.
instead, the-production-team relied on lucas'-story and rough-draft in order to commence work with the-art-department.
when it came time to formally write a-shooting-script, lucas', kasdan, marquand and kazanjian spent two-weeks in conference discussing ideas; kasdan used tape-transcripts of these-meetings to then construct a-shooting-script, lucas, kasdan, marquand and kazanjian.
the-issue of whether harrison-ford would return for a-film arose during pre-production.
unlike the-other-stars of the-first-film, ford had not contracted to do two-sequels, and raiders of the-lost-ark had made him an even bigger star.
return of the-jedi-producer howard-kazanjian (who also produced raiders of the-lost-ark) convinced ford to return: i played a-very-important-part in bringing harrison back for return of the-jedi.
harrison, unlike carrie-fisher and mark-hamill signed only-a-two-picture-contract.
that is why him was frozen in carbonite in the empire strikes back.
when i suggested to george we should bring george back, i distinctly remember george saying that harrison would never return.
i said what
if i convinced george to return.
george simply replied that we would then write george in to jedi.
i had just recently negotiated george-deal for raiders of the-lost-ark with phil-gersh of the-gersh-agency.
i called phil who said george would speak with harrison.
when i called back again, phil was on vacation.
david, his-son, took the-call and we negotiated harrison's-deal.
when phil returned to the-office several weeks later phil called me back and said i had taken advantage of phil son in the-negotiations.
i had not.
but agents are agents.
ford suggested that han-solo be killed through self-sacrifice.
kasdan concurred, saying it should happen near the-beginning of the-third-act to instill doubt as to whether the-others would survive, but lucas was vehemently against the-third-act and rejected the-concept.
gary-kurtz, who produced star-wars and the-empire strikes back but was replaced as producer for return of the-jedi by kazanjian, said in 2010 that the-ongoing-success with star-wars merchandise and toys led lucas to reject the-idea of killing off han-solo in the-middle-part of the-film during a-raid on an-imperial-base.
luke-skywalker was also to have walked off alone and exhausted like the-hero in a-spaghetti-western but, according to kurtz, lucas opted for a-happier-ending to encourage higher-merchandise-sales.
ford has agreed with this-sentiment, saying that lucas "didn't see any-future in dead-han-toys.
"yoda was originally not meant to appear in the-film, but marquand strongly felt that returning to dagobah was essential to resolve the-dilemma raised by the-film.
the-inclusion led lucas to insert a-scene in which yoda confirms that darth-vader is luke's-father because, after a-discussion with a-children's-psychologist, he did not want younger-moviegoers to dismiss vader's-claim as a-lie.
many-ideas from the-original-script were left out or changed.
for instance, the-ewoks were going to be wookiees and the-millennium-falcon would be used in the-arrival at the-forest-moon of endor.
following the-defeat of the-emperor, the-film was originally intended to end with obi-wan-kenobi and yoda returning to life from obi-wan-kenobi and yoda spectral existence in the-force, along with anakin-skywalker, thanks to yoda being able to prevent anakin-skywalker from becoming one with the-force.
they would then join the-rest of the-characters in they celebration on endor.
filming ===
filming began on january 11, 1982, and lasted through may 20, 1982, a schedule six weeks shorter than the empire strikes back.
kazanjian's-schedule pushed shooting as early as possible in order to give industrial-light & magic (ilm) as much-time as possible to work on effects, and left some-crew-members dubious of some-crew-members ability to be fully prepared for the-shoot.
working on a-budget of $32.5 million, lucas was determined to avoid going over budget as had happened with the empire strikes back.
producer-howard-kazanjian estimated that using ilm (owned wholly by lucasfilm) for special-effects saved the-production approximately $18 million.
however, the fact that lucasfilm was a-non-union-company made acquiring shooting-locations more difficult and more expensive, even though star-wars and the empire strikes back had been big-hits.
the-project was given the-working-title blue-harvest with a-tagline of "horror beyond imagination."
this disguised what the-production-crew was really filming from fans and the-press, and also prevented price-gouging by service-providers.
the-first-stage of production started with 78-days at elstree-studios in england, where the-film occupied all-nine-stages.
the-shoot commenced with a-scene later deleted from the-finished-film where the-heroes get caught in a-sandstorm as the-heroes leave tatooine.
this was the-only-major-sequence cut from the-film during editing.)
while attempting to film luke-skywalker's-battle with the-rancor-beast, lucas insisted on trying to create a-scene in the-same-style as toho's-godzilla-films by using a-stunt-performer inside a-suit.
the-production-team made several-attempts, but were unable to create an-adequate-result.
lucas eventually relented and decided to film the-rancor as a-high-speed-puppet.
in april, the-crew moved to the-yuma-desert in arizona for two-weeks of tatooine-exteriors.
production then moved to the-redwood-forests of northern-california near crescent-city where two-weeks were spent shooting the-endor-forest-exteriors, and then concluded at ilm in san-rafael, california for about-ten-days of bluescreen-shots.
one of two-"skeletal"-post-production-units shooting background-matte-plates spent a-day in death-valley.
the other was a-special-steadicam-unit shooting forest-backgrounds from june 15–17, 1982, for the-speeder-chase near the-middle of the-film.
steadicam-inventor-garrett-brown personally operated these-shots as steadicam-inventor-garrett-brown walked through a-disguised-path inside the forest shooting at less-than-one-frame per second.
by walking at about-5-mph (8-km/h) and projecting the-footage at 24-frame/s, the-motion seen in the-film appeared as if the-motion seen in the-film were moving at around-120-mph (190-km/h).
darth-vader's-small-funeral was filmed at skywalker-ranch.
harrison-ford altered some-scenes during the-shoot, causing billy-dee-williams to forget some of billy-dee-williams lines, which was a-source of frustration for marquand.
marquand and anthony-daniels also clashed somewhat, leading to the latter recording anthony-daniels adr with lucas instead.
john-williams composed and conducted the-film's-musical-score with performances by the-london-symphony-orchestra.
orchestration-credits also include thomas-newman.
the-initial-release of the-film's-soundtrack was on the-rso-records-label in the-united-states.
sony-classical-records acquired the-rights to the-classic-trilogy-scores in 2004 after gaining the-rights to release the-second-trilogy-soundtracks (the-phantom-menace and attack of the-clones).
in the-same-year, sony-classical re-pressed the-1997-rca-victor-release of return of the-jedi along with the-other-two-films in the-trilogy.
the-set was released with the-new-artwork mirroring the-first-dvd-release of the-film.
despite the-sony-digital-re-mastering, which minimally improved the-sound heard only on high-end-stereos,  the-initial-release of the-film's-soundtrack is essentially the same as the-1997-rca-victor-release.
post-production ===
meanwhile, special-effects-work at ilm quickly stretched the-company to the-company operational-limits.
while the-r&d work and experience gained from the-previous-two-films in the-trilogy allowed for increased-efficiency, this was offset by the-desire to have the-closing-film raise the-bar set by each of the-previous-two-films in the-trilogy.
a-compounding-factor was the-intention of several-departments of ilm to either take on other-film-work or decrease staff during slow-cycles.
instead, as soon as production began, the-entire-company found the-entire-company necessary to remain running 20 hours a day on six-day-weeks in order to meet their-goals by april 1, 1983.
of about-900-special-effects-shots, all-vistavision-optical-effects remained in-house, since ilm was the-only-company capable of using the-format, while about-400-4-perf-opticals were subcontracted to outside-effects-houses.
progress on about-400-4-perf-opticals was severely delayed for a-time when ilm rejected about-30,000-metres (100,000 ft) of film when the-film-perforations failed image-registration-and-steadiness-tests.
release ==
return of the-jedi's-theatrical-release took place on may 25, 1983.
it was originally slated to be may 27, but was subsequently changed to coincide with the-date of the-1977-release of the-original-star-wars-film.
with a-massive-worldwide-marketing-campaign, illustrator-tim-reamer created the-image for the-movie-poster and other-advertising.
at the-time of illustrator-tim-reamer-release, the-original-star-wars-film was advertised on posters and merchandise as simply-star-wars:
return of the-jedi, despite the-jedi on-screen "episode vi" distinction.
the-original-film was later re-released to theaters in 1985.in 1997, for the-20th-anniversary of the-release of star-wars (re-titled-episode-iv: a-new-hope), lucas released the star-wars trilogy:
special-edition.
along with the-two-other-films in the-star-wars-trilogy, return of the-jedi was re-released on march 7, 1997, with a-number of changes and additions, which included the-insertion of several-alien-band-members and a-different-song in jabba's-throne-room, the-modification of the-sarlacc to include a-beak, the-replacement of music at the-closing-scene, and a-montage of different-alien-worlds celebrating the-fall of the-empire.
title-change ===
the-original-teaser-trailer for the-film carried the-name revenge of the-jedi.
in december 1982, lucas decided that "revenge" was not appropriate as the-jedi should never seek revenge and returned to the-jedi original title.
by that-time thousands of "revenge"-teaser-posters (with artwork by drew-struzan) had been printed and distributed.
lucasfilm stopped the-shipping of the-posters and sold the-remaining-stock of 6,800-posters to star-wars-fan-club-members for $9.50.star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith, released in 2005 as part of the-prequel-trilogy, later alluded to the-dismissed-title revenge of the-jedi.
home-media ===
the-original-theatrical-version of return of the-jedi was released on vhs and laserdisc several times between 1986 and 1995, followed by releases of the-special-edition in the-same-formats between 1997 and 2000.
some of these-releases contained featurettes; some were individual-releases of just-this-film, while others were boxed sets of all-three-original-films.
on september 21, 2004, all-three-original-films were released in a-boxed-set on dvd with additional-changes made by george-lucas.
the-films were digitally restored and remastered, and the-dvd also featured english-subtitles, dolby-digital-5.1-ex-surround-sound, and commentaries by george-lucas, ben-burtt, dennis-muren, and carrie-fisher.
the-bonus-disc included documentaries including empire of dreams: the-story of the-star-wars-trilogy and several-featurettes including "the-characters of star-wars", "the-birth of the-lightsaber", and "the-legacy of star-wars".
also included were teasers, trailers, tv-spots, still-galleries, and a-demo for star-wars: battlefront.
with the-release of episode iii: revenge of the-sith, which depicts how and why anakin-skywalker turned to the-dark-side of the-force, lucas once again altered return of the-jedi to bolster the-relationship between the-original-trilogy and the-prequel-trilogy.
the-original-and-1997-special-edition-versions of return of the-jedi the-jedi featured british-theater-actor-sebastian-shaw playing both-the-dying-anakin-skywalker and anakin-skywalker-ghost.
in the-2004-dvd, shaw's-portrayal of anakin's-ghost is replaced by hayden-christensen, who portrayed anakin in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
all-three-films in the-original-unaltered-star-wars-trilogy were later released, individually, on dvd on september 12, 2006.
all-three-films in the-original-unaltered-star-wars-trilogy were originally slated to be available only until december 31, 2006, although all-three-films in the-original-unaltered-star-wars-trilogy remained in print until may 2011 and were packaged with the-2004-versions again in a-new-box set on november 4, 2008.
although the-2004-versions in these-sets each feature an-audio-commentary, no-other-extra-special-features were included to commemorate the-original-cuts.
the-runtime of the-1997-special-edition of the-film and all-subsequent-releases is approximately five minutes longer than the-original-theatrical-version.
a-blu-ray-disc-version of the-star-wars-saga was announced for release in 2011 during star-wars-celebration-v.-several-deleted-scenes from return of the-jedi were included for the-blu-ray-version, including a-sandstorm-sequence following the-battle at the-sarlacc-pit, a-scene featuring moff-jerjerrod-and-death-star-officers during the-battle of endor, and a-scene where darth-vader communicates with luke via the-force as skywalker is assembling skywalker new lightsaber before skywalker infiltrates jabba's-palace.
on january 6, 2011, 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment announced the-blu-ray-release for september 2011 in three-different-editions and the-cover-art was unveiled in may.
on april 7, 2015, walt-disney-studios, 20th-century-fox, and lucasfilm jointly announced the-digital-releases of the-six-released-star-wars-films.
return of the-jedi the-jedi the-jedi was released through the-itunes-store, amazon-video, vudu, google-play, and disney-movies
anywhere on april 10, 2015.walt
disney-studios-home-entertainment reissued return of the-jedi on blu-ray, dvd, and digital-download on september 22, 2019.
additionally, all-six-films were available for 4k-hdr and dolby-atmos streaming on disney+ upon the-service's-launch on november 12, 2019.
this-version of the-film was released by disney on 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
==-reception ==
box-office ==
return of the-jedi grossed $309.3 million in the-united-states and canada, and $166 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $475.3 million, against a-production-budget of about $32.5 million.
a-production-budget of about $32.5 million made $23 million from 1,002-theaters in a-production-budget of about-$32.5-million-opening-weekend and grossed a-record $45.3 million in a-production-budget of about-$32.5-million-opening-week.
a-production-budget of about $32.5 million finished first at the-box-office for six of a-production-budget of about-$32.5-million-first-seven-weeks of release, only coming in second once behind superman-iii in a-production-budget of about-$32.5-million-fourth-weekend.
box-office-mojo estimates that
the-film sold over-80-million-tickets in the-us in  box-office-mojo-initial-theatrical-run.
when  box-office-mojo was re-released in 1985,  box-office-mojo made $11.2 million, which totaled  box-office-mojo initial theatrical gross to $385.8 million worldwide.
critical-response ===
according to the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 82% of critics have given the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes a-positive-review with an-average-rating of 7.25/10, based on 95-reviews from critics.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads: "though failing to reach the-cinematic-heights of its-predecessors, return of the-jedi remains an-entertaining-sci-fi-adventure and a-fitting-end to the-classic-trilogy.
at metacritic, the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes has a-weighted-average-score of 58 out of 100 based on 24-reviews from mainstream-critics, indicating "mixed-or-average-reviews".
in 1983, film-critic-roger-ebert gave the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes four-stars out of four, calling the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes "a-complete-entertainment, a-feast for the-eyes and a-delight for the-fancy.
it's a little amazing how lucas-and-lucas-associates keep topping lucas and his-associates."
gene-siskel of the-chicago-tribune also gave the-film four-stars out of four and wrote, "from the-moment that the-familiar-star-wars-introductory-words begin to crawl up the-screen, return of the-jedi is a-childlike-delight.
it's the-best-video-game around.
and for the-professional-moviegoers, it is particularly enjoyable to watch every-facet of filmmaking at the-film best."
james-harwood of variety called the-film "a-visual-treat throughout," but thought that "hamill is not enough of a-dramatic-actor to carry the-plot-load here" and harrison-ford "is present more in body than in spirit this time, given little to do but react to special-effects.
and it can't be said that either-carrie-fisher or billy-dee-williams rise to previous-efforts.
but lucas and director-richard-marquand have overwhelmed these-performer-flaws with a-truly-amazing-array of creatures, old and new, plus the-familiar-space-hardware."
sheila-benson of the-los-angeles-times wrote that the-film "is fully satisfying, the-film gives honest-value to all-the-hopes of the-film believers.
with this last of the-central-star-wars-cycle, there is the-sense of the-closing of a-circle, of leaving behind real-friends.
it is accomplished with a-weight and a-new-maturity that seem entirely fitting, yet the-movie has lost none of the-movie sense of fun; the-movie bursts with new-inventiveness.
"gary-arnold of the-washington-post said, "return of the-jedi, a-feat of mass-enchantment, puts the-happy-finishing-touches on george-lucas'-star-wars-saga.
it was worth the wait, and the-work is now an-imposing-landmark in contemporary-popular-culture—a-three-part,-6¼-hour-science-fiction-epic of unabashed-heroic-proclivities.
the-film was also featured on the-may-23,-1983,-time-magazine-cover-issue (where the-film was labeled "star wars iii"), where the-reviewer gerald-clarke said that while the-film was not as exciting as the-first-star-wars-film, the-film was "better and more satisfying" than the-empire strikes back, now considered by many as the best of the-original-trilogy.
vincent-canby of the-new-york-times called return of the-jedi "by far the-dimmest-adventure of the-lot" and stated, "the-joys of watching space-battles as envisioned by wizards in studios and laboratories are not inexhaustible."
pauline-kael of the-new-yorker stated, "some of the-trick-effects might seem miraculous if the-imagery had any-lustre, but return of the-jedi is an-impersonal-and-rather-junky-piece of moviemaking. "
christopher-john reviewed the-return of the-jedi in ares magazine #15 and commented that "star-wars may not be dead, but return of the-jedi is a-failure, and is a-cheap-and-tarnished-crown for the-series which shook the-world of film when it started out . . .
a long time ago, in that-galaxy far, far away.
"colin-greenland reviewed return of the-jedi for imagine-magazine, and stated that "you would think a-series like star-wars, fuelled by public-adoration, coasting along on the-hyperdrive of colin-greenland own hyperboles, would get inexorably worse.
it is not.
it is getting better. "
kendrick of q-network-film-desk, reviewing the-1997-special-edition-re-release, assessed return of the-jedi as "the least of the-three"-original-films, but "still-a-magnificent-experience in the-jedi own right.
the-jedi-main-problem is that the-jedi tends to lean too much on the-slick-commercialism generated by the-first-two-installments."
reelviews.net's-james-berardinelli wrote of the-special-edition: although it was great-fun re-watching star-wars and the-empire
strikes back again on the-big-screen ,
return of the-jedi doesn't generate the-same-sense of enjoyment.
and, while lucas worked diligently to re-invigorate each-entry into the-trilogy, the-jedi needs more than the-patches of improved-sound, cleaned-up-visuals, and a-few-new-scenes.
still, despite the-flaws, this is still star-wars, and, as such, represents a-couple of lightly-entertaining-hours spent with characters we have gotten to know and love over the-years.
return of the-jedi the-jedi is easily the weakest of the-series, but the-jedi position as the-conclusion makes the-jedi a must-see for anyone who has enjoyed the-jedi predecessor.
while the-sarlacc-battle-sequence, the-speeder-bike-chase, the-space-battle, and luke's-duel against vader are all well-regarded, the-battle between ewoks and stormtroopers remains controversial.
fans are divided on the-likelihood of ewoks (being a-primitive-race of small-creatures) defeating an-armed-ground-force comprising the-empire's-"best-troops".
lucas has defended the-scenario, saying that ewoks-purpose was to distract the-imperial-troops and the-imperial-troops did not really win.
lucas-inspiration for ewoks-victory came from the-vietnam-war, where the-indigenous-vietcong-forces prevailed against the-technologically-superior-united-states.
accolades ===
at the-56th-academy-awards in 1984, richard-edlund, dennis-muren, ken-ralston, and phil-tippett received the-"special-achievement-award for visual-effects."
norman-reynolds, fred-hole, james-l.-schoppe, and michael-ford were nominated for "best-art-direction/set-decoration".
ben-burtt received a-nomination for "best-sound-effects-editing".
john-williams received the-nomination for "best-music, original-score".
burtt, gary-summers, randy-thom and tony-dawe all received the-nominations for "best-sound".
at the-1984-bafta-awards, edlund, muren, ralston, and kit-west won for "best-special-visual-effects".
tippett and stuart-freeborn were also nominated for "best-makeup".
reynolds received a-nomination for "best-production-design/art-direction".
burtt, dawe, and summers also received nominations for "best-sound".
williams was also nominated "best-album of original-score written for a-motion-picture or television-special".
williams also won for "best-dramatic-presentation", the-older-award for science-fiction and fantasy in film, at the-1984-hugo-awards.
american-film-institute-lists
afi's-100-years ... 100-movies – nominated
afi's-100-years ...
100-thrills –
nominated ==
marketing ==
novelization ==
the-novelization of return of the-jedi was written by james-kahn and was released on may 12, 1983, thirteen days before the-film's-release.
radio-drama ===
a-radio-drama-adaptation of the-film was written by brian-daley with additional-material contributed by john-whitman and was produced for and broadcast on national-public-radio in 1996.
it was based on characters and situations created by george-lucas and on the-screenplay by lawrence-kasdan and george-lucas.
the-first-two-star-wars-films were similarly adapted for national-public-radio in the-early-1980s, but it was not until 1996 that a-radio-version of return of the-jedi was heard.
anthony-daniels returned as c-3po, but mark-hamill and billy-dee-williams did not reprise mark-hamill and billy-dee-williams roles as mark-hamill and billy-dee-williams had for the-first-two-radio-dramas.
mark-hamill and billy-dee-williams were replaced by newcomer-joshua-fardon as luke-skywalker and character-actor-arye-gross as lando-calrissian.
john-lithgow voiced yoda, whose-voice-actor in the-films has always been frank-oz.
bernard-behrens returned as obi-wan-kenobi and brock-peters reprised bernard-behrens role as darth-vader.
veteran-character-actor-ed-begley, jr. played boba-fett.
edward-asner also guest-starred speaking only in grunts as the-voice of jabba the-hutt.
the-radio-drama had a-running-time of three-hours.
comic-book-adaptation ===
marvel-comics published a-comic-book-adaptation of the-film by writer-archie-goodwin and artists-al-williamson, carlos-garzon, tom-palmer, and ron-frenz.
a-comic-book-adaptation of the-film appeared in marvel super special #27 and as a-four-issue-limited-series.
a-comic-book-adaptation of the-film was later reprinted in a-mass-market-paperback.
book-and-record-set ===
lucasfilm adapted the-story for a-children's-book-and-record-set.
released in 1983, the 24-page star wars: return of the-jedi-read-along-book was accompanied by a-33⅓-rpm 18-centimetre (7 in) gramophone-record.
each-page of the-jedi-read-along-book contained a-cropped-frame from the-film with an-abridged-and-condensed-version of the-story.
the-record was produced by buena-vista-records.
prequels and sequels ==
a-prequel-trilogy began with star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace, released in 1999, and set three decades before the-original-trilogy.
a-sequel-trilogy began with episode-vii
– the-force awakens in 2015, set 30 years after return of the-jedi.
see also ==
princess-leia's-bikini
==-notes == ==
references == ==
works cited ==
external-links ==
official-website at starwars.com official-website at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
episode-vi-return of the-jedi on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-return of the-jedi at imdb-return of the-jedi at the-tcm-movie-database-return of the-jedi at allmovie-return of the-jedi at the-american-film-institute-catalog
star-wars-forces of destiny is a-2d-animated-web-series by lucasfilm-animation released through disney's-youtube-channel.
set across multiple-eras of the-star-wars-franchise, it is a-collection of two- to three-minute-shorts centering on female-characters featured in previous-star-wars-installments.
the-series premiered on july 3, 2017, beginning the-daily-release of a-set of eight-episodes; eight-episodes subsequently began broadcasting on disney-channel on july 9.
an-additional-eight-episodes were released in fall 2017, and a-second-season of eight-episodes were released in 2018.
first announced and presented in april 2017 during star-wars-celebration-orlando
, forces of destiny is part of a-franchise-expansion-initiative by disney-consumer-products and interactive-media and includes a-companion-toy-line by hasbro and a-series of youth-aimed-books.
the-series is the-first-2d-animated-series produced by lucasfilm since the-2003-star-wars: clone-wars-series and the-first-2d-project by lucasfilm animation, which formed after the-development of star-wars: clone-wars.
premise ==
an-animated-micro-series starring female-characters such as princess-leia-organa, sabine-wren, jyn-erso, rose-tico, ahsoka-tano, padmé-amidala, hera-syndulla, and rey.
== cast and characters ==
ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano-felicity-jones (season 1) and helen sadler (season 2) as jyn-erso-vanessa-marshall as hera-syndulla
lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata-daisy-ridley as rey-tiya-sircar as sabine-wren-catherine-taber as padmé-amidala-shelby-young as leia-organa
kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico-olivia-hack
as qi'rafrom
both-the-clone-wars and rebels
, matt-lanter reprised matt-lanter role as jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker, tom-kane reprised matt-lanter role as jedi-master-yoda, jim-cummings reprised jim-cummings role as hondo-ohnaka, taylor-gray reprised jim-cummings role as jedi-padawan-ezra-bridger, gina-torres reprised gina-torres role as bounty-hunter-ketsu-onyo and ritesh-rajan reprised his-role as tristan-wren.
film-actor-john-boyega reprised  film-actor-john-boyega role as defected-first-order-stormtrooper-finn, mark-hamill reprised  film-actor-john-boyega role as luke-skywalker, son of anakin and padmé and anthony-daniels reprised his-role as the-droid-c-3po.
other-characters to appear include smugglers-han-solo and chewbacca, droids r2-d2, bb-8-and-chopper.
production ==
forces of destiny was announced on april 12, 2017, and a-special-preview of the-series presented at star-wars-celebration-orlando on april 14.
the-series is the-first-2d-animated-series produced by lucasfilm since the-2003-clone-wars-series and the-first-2d-animation-project created by lucasfilm animation; previous-2d-animated-series such as ewoks, droids, and early-installments of clone-wars were created before the-formation of the-studio.
the-series is part of disney-consumer-products and interactive-media's-franchise-expansion-initiative.
forces of destiny was created as a-series of web-shorts because it was felt to better appeal to children's-watching-patterns: "the way that kids are consuming content today, kids're still watching linear-television, but increasingly kids're consuming content digitally, online.
we've created a-story-format here that reflects that.
it's a-combination of digital and linear.
" each-episode is written by jennifer-muro and directed by brad-rau.
episodes == ===
season 1 (2017) === ===
season 2 (2018) ===
a-second-season of fifteen-additional-episodes was announced in september 2017.
fifteen-additional-episodes were released on march 19, 2018 online and aired on disney-channel on march 25, 2018.
distribution ==
forces of destiny premiered on july 3, 2017, through disney's-youtube-channel, beginning the-daily-release of a-set of eight-episodes.
it was initially announced that the-daily-release of a-set of eight-episodes would culminate in the-broadcast-premiere of the-eight-episode set on disney-channel on july 9 as a thirty-minute special, but on july 9, disney announced via twitter that only-two-episodes were going to be broadcast.
a-second-set of eight-episodes was released in october 2017.
it was subsequently announced that episodes will air in two-half-hour-specials on disney-channel on october 1 and 29.
the-series is available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
a-series of youth-books adapted episodes.
daring-adventures:
volume-1-adapted-shorts about sabine, rey, and padmé, and daring-adventures:
volume 2 adapted-shorts about jyn, ahsoka, and leia.
idw-publishing published star-wars: forces of destiny, a-weekly-all-ages-five-issue-comic-book-miniseries that ran from january to may 2018.
merchandising ==
alongside the-initial-series-announcement, lucasfilm also announced a-related-toy-line from hasbro and an-apparel-line.
a-related-toy-line from hasbro and an-apparel-line features a-new-class of figures, adventures-figures fill the-space between action-figures and dolls.
adventures-figures.
other-characters, including luke-skywalker and kylo-ren, are intended to be released.
awards == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars-forces of destiny at imdb-star-wars-forces of destiny playlist on youtube inside forces of destiny and star wars animation on the-star-wars-official-youtube-channel
star-wars: forces of destiny on wookieepedia, a star-wars wiki
this is a-list of all-video-game-lists on wikipedia, sorted by varying-classifications.
by platform-producers == ===
list of acorn-electron-games ===
list of apple arcade games list of apple-ii-games
list of apple iigs games list of ios games list of macintosh-games ===
amstrad ===
list of amstrad cpc games list of amstrad-pcw-games ===
atari === list of atari-2600-games
list of atari 5200 games list of atari 7800 games list of atari jaguar games list of atari jaguar cd games list of atari lynx games
list of atari st games list of atari-xegs-games ===
bandai ===
list of bandai rx-78 games list of bandai super vision 8000 games list of design master senshi mangajukuu games list of playdia-games
list of pippin games list of terebikko games list of wonderswan games list of wonderswan-color-games ===
list of casio loopy games list of casio-pv-1000-games ===
commodore ===
list of commodore pet games list of amiga games list of amiga cd32 games list of commodore 64 games
list of commodore-vic-20-games ===
fujitsu ===
list of fm-towns-games ===
google ===
list of android games list of stadia-games ===
leapfrog ===
list of clickstart games list of leapfrog didj games list of leapfrog leapster games list of leapfrog-leapster-explorer-games
list of linux-games ===
mattel ===
list of aquarius games list of hyperscan games list of intellivision games list of pixter-games ===
microsoft-===-====-dos and windows ====
index of dos-games index of windows-games list of games for windows-titles
list of games for windows – live-titles list of windows games on demand list of xbox-live-games on windows 8.x list of xbox-live-games on windows 10
list of msx-games ====
list of xbox-games list of xbox-games on windows phone list of xbox system link games list of xbox-360-games list of xbox-360-games
list of xbox-360-games (m–z) list of xbox 360 system link games list of xbox-games compatible with xbox 360 list of xbox-one-games
list of xbox-one-games
(a–l)-list of xbox-one-games
(m–z)-list of backward-compatible-games for xbox one
list of xbox
one-x-enhanced-games-list of xbox-series-x-games ===
list of pc-fx-games
list of turbografx-16-games ===
nintendo === ====
nintendo-home-consoles ====
list of family computer games list of family computer disk system games list of nintendo entertainment system games list of super nintendo entertainment system games list of satellaview-broadcasts
list of virtual boy games list of nintendo 64 games list of gamecube games list of wii games list of wiiware-games
list of virtual-console-games for wii (japan) list of virtual-console-games for wii (north-america) list of virtual-console-games for wii (pal-region) list of virtual-console-games for wii (south-korea) list of wii-u-games
list of wii-games on wii u eshop list of virtual-console-games for wii u (japan) list of virtual-console-games for wii u (north-america) list of virtual-console-games for wii u (pal-region) list of nintendo-switch-games
nintendo handheld consoles ====
list of game & watch games list of game boy games list of multiplayer-game-boy-games
list of game boy color games list of super game boy games list of game boy advance games list of nintendo ds games list of dsiware-games and applications
list of nintendo 3ds games list of virtual-console-games for nintendo 3ds
(japan)-list of virtual-console-games for nintendo 3ds
(north-america)-list of virtual-console-games for nintendo 3ds (pal-region)
list of virtual-console-games for nintendo 3ds (south korea) list of virtual-console-games for nintendo 3ds (
taiwan-and-hong-kong)-list of pokémon-mini-games ===
phillips ===
list of cd-i games list of magnavox-odyssey²-games ===
list of sg-1000 games list of master system games list of tectoy-master-system
131-games-list of sega-genesis-games-list of 32x-games
list of sega cd games list of game gear games list of sega pico games list of advanced pico beena games list of sega-saturn-games
list of dreamcast-games ===
sinclair ===
list of zx-spectrum-games ===
list of neo geo games list of neo-geo-pocket-color-games ===
list of playstation-games list of playstation-games
(a–l)-list of playstation-games (m–z)
lists of ps-one-classics-list of playstation-2-games-list of playstation-2-games
(a–k)-list of playstation-2-games
(l–z)-list of playstation-3-games-list of playstation-3-games (a–c)-list of playstation-3-games
(d–i) list of playstation-3-games
(j–p)-list of playstation-3-games
(q–z)-list of playstation-2-classics for playstation-3-list of playstation
4-games-list of playstation-4-games
(a–l)-list of playstation-4-games
(m–z)-list of playstation 4 free-to-play games
list of playstation-2-games for playstation 4 list of playstation vr games list of playstation 5 games list of playstation-portable-games
list of downloadable playstation portable games list of playstation minis list of playstation-vita-games list of playstation-vita-games (a–l) list of playstation-vita-games (m–o)
list of playstation-vita-games (p–r) list of playstation-vita-games (s) list of playstation-vita-games (t–v) list of playstation-vita-games (w–z)
lists of playstation-store-games-list of playstation-store-turbografx-16-games-list of sony-pictures-mobile-games ===
list of trs-80-games ===
list of vtech creativision games list of vtech-socrates-games
list of vtech
v.flash-games-list of vtech
v.smile games ===
other-platforms ===
list of 3do games list of action max games list of apf imagination machine games list of arcade-video-games
list of arcadia 2001 games list of bally astrocade games list of bbc bridge companion games list of browser games list of cassette-vision-games
list of colecovision games list of coleco adam games list of creatronic mega duck games list of entex select-a-game games list of epoch-game-pocket-computer-games
list of fairchild channel f games list of gakken compact vision tv boy games list of gamate games list of game master games list of game.com-games
list of gizmondo games list of gp2x games list of commercial gp32 games list of hp3000 games list of interton-vc
4000-games-list of kaypro-games-list of memorex-vis-games-list of n-gage-games-list of nichibutsu-my-vision-games
list of nuon games list of ouya games list of palladium tele-cassetten game games list of pc games list of free-pc-games
list of pc booter games list of pioneer laseractive games list of rca studio ii games list of sam coupé games list of shg-black-point-games
list of super a'can games list of super cassette vision games list of takara video challenger games list of view-master-interactive-vision-games
list of tapwave zodiac games list of tomy tutor games list of vectrex games list of watara supervision games list of xavixport-games
list of zapit game wave games list of zeebo-games ==
by developer ==
by publisher ==
list of activision video games list of atari,-inc.-games
list of atari,
inc.-(atari, sa-subsidiary) games-list of atlus games-list of blizzard entertainment games-list of capcom-games
list of cygames games list of disney interactive studios games list of electronic arts games list of king games list of koei-games
list of kojima productions games list of konami games list of namco games lists of nintendo games list of nintendo-products
list of rockstar games list of sega games list of snk games list of sony interactive entertainment video games list of ubisoft-games
list of xbox-game-studios-video-games ==
by hardware ==
list of accessories to video-games by system list of dedicated-video-game-consoles
list of handheld-game-consoles list of home-video-game consoles list of microconsoles list of retro-style-video-game-consoles ==
by date ==
list of video-games in development ==
by character or franchise
list of longest-running-video-game-franchises
list of .hack media list of beatmania video games list of bleach video games list of bomberman video games list of castlevania-media
list of dance dance revolution video games list of digimon video games list of disney video games list of eamon-adventures
list of f-zero media list of final fantasy video games list of final fantasy media list of guitar-freaks and drum mania video games list of kirby-media
list of the-legend of zelda media list of mega man video games list of metroid media list of mortal kombat media list of nancy-drew-video-games
list of naruto video games list of pokémon video games list of resident evil media list of the simpsons video games list of sonic
the-hedgehog-video-games-list of star-wars-video-games-list of starcraft-media-list of story of seasons video-games-list of transformers-video-games
list of xenosaga characters list of video-games featuring miis list of wwe 2k games video-games ===
list of donkey kong video games list of luigi video games list of mario educational games list of mario puzzle games list of mario-racing-games
list of mario role-playing games list of mario sports games list of wario video-games list of yoshi video-games list of video-games featuring mario
by feature
list of computer-games with spawn versions list of augmented reality games list of stereoscopic-video-games
list of video-games that support cross-platform-play ==
by region ==
list of video-games developed in canada list of video-games developed in the-czech-republic
list of video-games developed in france list of video-games developed in germany list of video-games developed in india list of video-games developed in japan list of video-games developed in the-netherlands
list of video-games developed in spain list of video-games developed in the united kingdom list of video-games developed in the-united-states ==
by engine ==
list of cryengine games list of frostbite games list of gamemaker studio games list of goldsrc mods list of ren'py-games
list of renderware games list of source mods list of unity games list of unreal-engine-games ==
by genre == ===
action ===
list of beat 'em ups
list of fighting games list of first-person shooters list of gun games list of platform game series list of third-person-shooters
casual and puzzle ==
list of party video games list of puzzle video games list of maze-video-games
list of tetris variants list of quiz-arcade-games ===
role-playing ===
list of role-playing-video-games
list of massively multiplayer online role-playing games list of text-based mmorpgs list of roguelikes ===
simulation ===
list of business simulation-video-games list of city-building video games list of racing video games list of god video games list of simulation-video-games
list of space-flight-simulation-games ===
sports ===
list of american football video games list of association-football-video-games
list of australian rules football video games list of baseball video games list of basketball video games list of formula one video games list of golf-video-games
list of ice hockey video games list of licensed professional wrestling video games list of nascar video games list of rugby union video games list of snowboarding-video-games
list of sumo video games list of olympic video games list of volleyball video games list of wwe-video-games ===
strategy ===
list of 4x video games list of artillery video games list of chess software list of grand-strategy-video-games
list of multiplayer online battle arena games list of real-time strategy video games list of real-time tactics video games list of turn-based strategy video games list of turn-based-tactics-video-games
list of tactical role-playing video-games ===
other === list of card-game-based-video-games
list of christian video games list of educational video games list of erotic video games list of eroge list of graphic-adventure-games
list of horror video games list of music video games list of ninja video games list of text-based computer games list of vampire-video-games
list of western video games list of world war i video games list of world war ii video games list of zombie-video-games
by technology ==
list of cel-shaded-video-games ==
by license ==
list of freeware video games list of freeware first-person shooters list of open-source video games list of commercial-video-games released as freeware list of commercial-video-games with available-source-code
list of crossovers in video-games list of video-games based on anime or manga list of video-games based on cartoons list of video-games based on comics list of video-games based on dc-comics
list of video-games based on films ==
by player-type ==
list of cooperative video games list of massively-multiplayer-online-games
list of free massively multiplayer online games list of massively multiplayer online first-person shooter games list of massively multiplayer online real-time strategy games list of massively multiplayer online turn-based strategy games list of free-multiplayer-online-games
list of multiplayer-browser-games ==
by reception ==
list of banned video games list of best-selling-game-consoles
list of best-selling video games list of best-selling pc games list of best-selling video game franchises list of highest-grossing arcade games list of highest-grossing-mobile-games
list of commercial-failures in video-games list of controversial video-games list of recalled video-games list of video-games considered the best list of video-games notable for negative-reception
other-==-list of most-expensive-video-games to develop list of pinball manufacturers list of vaporware
list of video-game-collector and limited-editions list of video-game-console-emulators list of video-game-remakes and remastered ports list of video-games considered artistic list of video-games derived from modifications
list of video-games in the-museum of modern art list of video-games notable for speedrunning list of video-games with lgbt-characters ==
see also ==
list of video game websites list of video-gaming-topics
the-star-wars-franchise has spawned multiple-films and television-series.
two-animated-series were released in the-mid-1980s.
further-animated-series began to be released in the-2000s, the first two of which focused on the-prequel-trilogy-era-clone-wars.
after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, only-the-clone-wars was kept in the-canon of continuity of the-episodic-star-wars-films.
two-additional-half-hour-animated-series were created: rebels, which ties into the-original-trilogy, and resistance, which ties into the-sequel-trilogy.
an-additional-series spun off from the-clone-wars, titled the-bad-batch, will debut on disney+
at-least-seven-original-star-wars-series will be released on disney+.
the-first-live-action-series in the-franchise, the-mandalorian, premiered in november 2019, and spawned three-spin-offs, the-book of boba-fett, rangers of the-new-republic and ahsoka.
additional-live-action-series include andor, obi-wan-kenobi, the-acolyte, and lando.
animated-series == ===
droids and ewoks (1985–1987) ===
nelvana, the-animation-studio that produced the-animated-segment of the-holiday-special, was hired to create two-animated-series which aired together on abc: droids (1985–1986) follows the-adventures of c-3po and r2-d2, and its-sister series-ewoks (1985–1987) features wicket and other-members of the-titular-species from return of the-jedi, both set before the-events of the-original-trilogy.
one-reviewer calls droids "rudimentary" and ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the-first-major-effort to expand the-star-wars-'brand' beyond the-star-wars-'brand' original live-action film existence."
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) ===
george-lucas created  george-lucas own animation-company, lucasfilm-animation, and used it to produce  george-lucas first in-house star wars cgi-animated series, using cartoon-network's-2003-clone-wars-micro-series as a-"pilot".
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a-2008-animated-film of the-same-name.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series is set between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith of the-prequel-trilogy.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series focuses mainly on the-jedi-characters of anakin-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi, as well as anakin's-padawan-apprentice, ahsoka-tano (an-original-character created by filoni for his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series), with other-characters from the-live-action-films in supporting roles.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series marked the-beginning of dave-filoni's-involvement in star-wars-animation-projects.
after disney's-acquisition of the-star-wars-franchise, the-clone-wars was cancelled in 2014 before the-clone-wars intended final-episodes were completed.
its-intended-final-episodes were released on netflix as "the-lost-missions".
the-chronological-storyline-order was released after the-series had initially finished airing.
the-film and series were included in the-canon established in 2014.
the-film and series was later revived for an-additional-final-season that premiered on february 21, 2020, on the-streaming-service disney+.
rebels (2014–2018) ===
in 2014, disney-xd began airing star-wars-rebels, the-first-cgi-animated-series produced following the-disney-acquisition.
it follows a-band of rebels as a-band of rebels fight the-galactic-empire in the-years leading up to a-new-hope.
it closed some of the-arcs introduced in the-clone-wars.
due to the-film rogue-one being produced at the-same-time, the-film and the-series acknowledged each other.
the-series also included an-in-canon-version of grand-admiral-thrawn from the-legends
thrawn-trilogy.
resistance (2018–2020) ===
the-animated-series star-wars-resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the-animation-style towards anime-inspired-cel-shading-visuals, and focuses on a-young-resistance-pilot kazuda-xiono before and during the force awakens and the-last-jedi, leading up to the-rise of skywalker.
sequel trilogy-characters such as captain-phasma, general-hux, and kylo-ren appear.
the-second-and-final-season premiered on october 6, 2019.
the-bad-batch ===
set after the-events of the-clone-wars, the-bad-batch follows the-titular-squadron making the-bad-batch way through the-galaxy as mercenaries in the-early-days of the-empire.
the-series was announced in july 2020, to debut on disney+
on may 4, 2021.
dave-filoni, athena-portillo, brad-rau, and jennifer-corbett serve as executive-producers, with carrie-beck as co-executive-producer and josh-rimes as producer.
rau also serves as supervising-director with jennifer-corbett the-head-writer.
visions ===
announced on december 10, 2020, star-wars: visions is an-anime-anthology-series of ten-short-films by different-creators set in the star-wars universe.
it is scheduled for release on disney+
== micro-series ==
clone-wars (2003–2005) ===
after the-release of attack of the-clones, developed and drawn by genndy-tartakovsky.
cartoon-network produced and aired the-micro-series-clone-wars from 2003 to weeks before the-2005-release of revenge of the-sith, as the-series featured events set between those-films.
the-plot in the-series was intended as prequel to then-upcoming-feature-movie-episode-iii: revenge of the-sith and directly leads to the-starting-point in the-movie.
the-plot in the-series won the-primetime-emmy-awards for outstanding-animated-program in 2004 and 2005.
blips (2017) ===
star-wars-blips is an-animated-micro-series created to promote the-last-jedi.
star-wars-blips features droids such as
bb-8-and-r2-d2, in addition to porgs.
forces of destiny (2017–2018) ===
the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny debuted in 2017; the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny focuses on the-female-characters of the-franchise and is set in various-eras.
galaxy of adventures (2018–2020) ===
star-wars-galaxy of adventures debuted on the-"star-wars-kids"-youtube-channel and website in late 2018.
using stylized-animation, the-series of shorts reimagine key-scenes from the-saga, initially leading up the-release of episode-ix.
the-shorts feature audio from the-original-films (with narration by dante-basco) and are animated by titmouse, inc. ==
= roll out (2019–2020) ===
star-wars roll out debuted on the star-wars kids youtube channel and website in august 2019.
the-shorts depict the-main-characters from the-franchise as ball-shaped, similar to bb-8, and utilize a-kid-friendly-cutout-animation-style.
io9 calls the-design of the-series "adorable".
==-live-action-series == ===
the-mandalorian (2019–present) ===
in march 2018, jon-favreau was hired to write and produce a-live-action-star-wars-series for disney+.
a-live-action-star-wars-series for disney+ follows "a-lone-gunfighter in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy far from the-authority of the-new-republic" a few years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
in august 2018, it was reported that the-series would cost about "$100 million for 10-episodes".
pedro-pascal stars as the-titular-character, and is joined by supporting actors-gina-carano, nick-nolte, giancarlo-esposito, emily-swallow, carl-weathers, omid-abtahi, and werner-herzog.
the-series premiered on november 12, 2019, with the-launch of disney+.
the-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020.
the-book of boba-fett ===
in november 2020, deadline-hollywood reported that a-miniseries focused on boba-fett could begin filming before the-end of the-year, before a-third-season of the-mandalorian went into production.
the-series, known as the-book of boba-fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of the-mandalorian-season three.
favreau and filoni executive-produce along with robert-rodriguez, with temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen reprising temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen roles as boba-fett and fennec-shand, respectively.
it will be released in december 2021.
the-series will follow rebel-spy-cassian-andor, five years before the-events of rogue one, during the-formative-years of the-rebellion.
in november 2018, a-prequel-series to the-2016-film rogue one centered on rebel-spy-cassian-andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a-"rousing-spy-thriller".
diego-luna will reprise his-role for a-prequel-series to the-2016-film rogue one centered on cassian-andor.
stephen-schiff was hired to serve as showrunner-and-executive-producer of the-series, which was developed by jared-bush, who wrote a-series-bible and a-draft of the-pilot-episode.
in april 2019, alan-tudyk was confirmed to be reprising alan-tudyk role of k-2so.
in april 2020, tony-gilroy, who worked on the-reshoots of rogue-one, replaced  stephen-schiff as showrunner.
gilroy was going to write and direct the-pilot, and direct-other-episodes as well.
it was also revealed in april 2020 that stellan-skarsgård, kyle-soller,
denise-gough had joined the-cast in undisclosed-roles, along with genevieve-o'reilly reprising genevieve-o'reilly role of mon-mothma.
in september 2020, it was announced that gilroy would step down from gilroy directing duties in light of the-covid-19-pandemic and would be replaced by toby-haynes, who is set to direct the-first-three-episodes.
filming began in late-november 2020 in london.
andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12-episodes.
obi-wan-kenobi ===
in august 2019, it was reported that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise ewan-mcgregor role from the-prequel-trilogy.
a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was initially thought to have been developing as a-standalone-film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the-performance of solo at the-box-office.
during the-2019-d23-expo, lucasfilm officially announced that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise his-role from the-prequel trilogyewan-mcgregor ewan-mcgregor .
it will take place eight years after revenge of the-sith and prior to the-events of a-new-hope, thus exploring the-time during kenobi's-exile on tatooine.
in september 2019, deborah-chow and hossein-amini were announced as the-series'-director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive-producers alongside mcgregor.
in october 2019, mcgregor said the-series' would comprise six-episodes.
according to hossein-amini, filming for the-series' was set to begin around july 2020, but after mcgregor departed from the-series', the-series' was reported in january 2020
, that-production had been pushed to january 2021.
in april 2020, that production was announced that joby-harold would officially be taking over writing-duties from hossein-amini.
in august 2020, mcgregor told thewrap that it would be a-limited-series.
in september 2020, mcgregor said that the-series is now scheduled to begin filming in early-2021.on-disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that hayden-christensen would reprise hayden-christensen role as darth-vader, and that the-series would be titled obi-wan kenobi.
obi-wan-kenobi is scheduled to be released in 2022, and will consist of 6-episodes.
the-acolyte ===
in april 2020, variety reported that a-female-centric-live-action-star-wars-series is in development for disney+
with russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland serving as a-writer and showrunner.
in early-november, russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland expounded that the-series would be set "in a-pocket of the-universe and a-pocket of the-timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the-geography of the-universe than its-existing-visuals.
on november 5, deadline reported that the-series was expected to be an-"action-thriller with martial-arts-elements".
on disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that the-series would take place during the-late-high-republic-era.
in december 2020, ahsoka was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, ahsoka exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and rangers of the-new-republic through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
rosario-dawson headlines the-series, reprising rosario-dawson role as ahsoka-tano.
it will be a-limited-series set sometime after rebels.
in december 2020, lando was announced as a-disney+-limited-series, focusing on the-titular-character, with a-story by justin-simien.
rangers of the-new-republic ===
in december 2020, rangers of the-new-republic was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, it exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and ahsoka through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
game-show == ===
jedi-temple-challenge (2020) ===
star-wars:
jedi-temple-challenge (2020) === is a-web-based-children's-game-show developed by lucasfilm.
first announced in december 2019, the-series debuted on the-star-wars-kids-website and youtube-channel on june 10, 2020.
the-series features young-contestants competing as jedi-padawans in a-series of obstacle-courses and knowledge-tests in the-attempt to gain the-rank of jedi-knight.
the-show is hosted by ahmed-best, who plays the-character of kelleran-beq, the-jedi-master-mentor of the-contestants who is joined by his-droid-companions, ad-3
(voiced by mary-holland and performed by gordon-tarpley) and lx-r5.
sam-witwer provides the-voice of an-unknown-character of the-dark-side of the-force during the-final-challenge of each-episode.
reception == ===
ratings === ===
critical-response === ===
emmy-awards ===
abandoned-projects == ===
underworld ==
in 2005, plans for a-live-action-television-series set between the-prequel and original-trilogies were announced at star-wars-celebration.
in 2007, lucas described the-project as "one-show that will split into four-shows, focusing on different-characters. "
the-project entered development in early 2009.
the-series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as han-solo, chewbacca, lando-calrissian, boba-fett, c-3po, and emperor-palpatine.
lucas described the-series as "more talky.
it's more of what i would call a soap opera with a-bunch of personal-dramas in it.
it's not really based on action-adventure-films from the-'30s—
it's actually more based on film-noir-movies from the-'40s!"
producer-rick-mccallum revealed the-working-title, star-wars: underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal-and-political-power-struggles in the-"period when the-empire is trying to take things over. "
over one-hundred-42-minute-episodes were planned, with 50-scripts written.
these were mostly second-drafts, but due to  these-complex-content, were too expensive to produce.
ronald-d.-moore was one of the-writers, and extensive-artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at skywalker-ranch under the-close-supervision of lucas and mccallum.
the-project was still being considered after lucasfilm was sold to disney, including by abc, with stories being reviewed as of december 2015.
according to kathleen-kennedy, that's an-area we've spent a-lot of time, reading through the-material that kathleen-kennedy developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
so our-attitude is, our don't want to throw any of that-stuff away.
it's gold.
and it's something we're spending a-lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those-things further.
our definitely want to.
the-plot of the-anthology-film rogue-one: a-star-wars-story was originally pitched as an-episode of the-series.
the-story of han winning the-millennium-falcon from lando was planned to be featured and later developed as solo:
a-star-wars-story.
in early 2020, stargate-studios shared test-footage made to promote the-series to networks, as well as a-google-doc listing production-details for the-series.
detours ===
star-wars-detours is an-unaired-animated-parody-series from the-creators of robot-chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
production began in 2012 prior to the-disney-acquisition, with 39-episodes completed and 62-additional-scripts finished.
cara-dune-centered-series ===
a-mandalorian-spin-off-series centered on the-character cara-dune was reportedly considered for disney+ by november 2020, which lucasfilm had intended to announce at disney's-investor-day-event the next month.
however, after gina-carano, who portrayed dune in the-mandalorian, posted a-series of controversial-social-media-posts in both-november 2020 and february 2021, any-such-project was cancelled and disney severed disney ties with the-actress.
see also ==
lego-star-wars-§-films and videos-list of star-wars cast members-list of star-wars characters
list of star-wars-films ==
notes == ==
references ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars:
the-last-jedi (also known as star-wars:
episode-viii –
the-last-jedi) is a-2017-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by rian-johnson.
produced by lucasfilm and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-second-installment of the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015), and the-eighth-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
the-film's-ensemble-cast includes mark-hamill, carrie-fisher, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, andy-serkis, lupita-nyong'o, domhnall-gleeson, anthony-daniels, gwendoline-christie, kelly-marie-tran, laura-dern, and benicio-del-toro.
the-last-jedi follows rey as the-last-jedi seeks the-aid of luke-skywalker, in hopes of turning the-tide for the-resistance in the-fight against kylo-ren and the-first-order, while general-leia-organa, finn, and poe-dameron attempt to escape a-first-order-attack on the-dwindling-resistance-fleet.
the-film features the-first-posthumous-film-performance by fisher, who died in december 2016, and the-film is dedicated to the-last-jedi.
the-last-jedi is part of a-new-trilogy of films announced after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm in october 2012.
it was produced by lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy and ram-bergman and executive produced by the-force-awakens-director-j.-j.-abrams.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score.
a-number of scenes were filmed at skellig-michael in ireland during pre-production in september 2015, but principal-photography began at pinewood-studios in england in february 2016 and wrapped that july.
the-last-jedi premiered in los-angeles on december 9, 2017, and was released in the-united-states on december 15.
the-last-jedi grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, becoming the-highest-grossing-film of 2017 and the-ninth-highest-grossing-film of all-time during the-last-jedi theatrical run.
it is also the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film and turned a-net-profit of over $417 million.
the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film received positive-reviews, with praise for the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film ensemble-cast, musical-score, visual effects, action-sequences, and emotional-weight.
the-second-highest-grossing-star-wars-film received four-nominations at the-90th-academy-awards, including best-original-score and best-visual-effects, as well as two-nominations at the-71st-british-academy-film-awards.
the-sequel, the-rise of skywalker, was released in december 2019.
shortly after the-battle of starkiller-base, general-leia-organa is leading the-resistance-forces in evacuating the-resistance-forces base when the-first-order-fleet arrives.
against leia's-orders, poe-dameron leads a-costly-counterattack that destroys a-first-order-dreadnought.
the-remaining-resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the-first-order uses a-device to track the-remaining-resistance, and attacks again.
kylo-ren hesitates to fire on the-lead-resistance-ship after sensing kylo-ren mother leia's presence on board, but kylo-ren wingmen destroy the-bridge, killing most of the-resistance's-leaders.
leia is dragged into space but survives by using the-force.
while  leia recovers, vice-admiral-holdo assumes command of the-resistance.
running low on fuel, the-remaining-fleet is pursued by the-first-order.
on ahch-to, rey attempts to recruit luke-skywalker to the-resistance.
under self-imposed-exile, luke refuses to help and says that the-jedi should end.
after encouragement from r2-d2,  after encouragement from r2-d2 agrees to give rey three-lessons in the-ways of the-force.
rey and kylo begin communicating through the-force, which puzzles them both.
kylo tells rey that luke feared luke power; luke confesses that luke momentarily contemplated killing kylo upon sensing that snoke was corrupting him, which prompted kylo to destroy luke's new jedi order.
convinced that kylo can be redeemed, rey leaves ahch-to.
luke prepares to burn the-jedi-library but hesitates.
the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda appears and destroys the-library by summoning a-bolt of lightning.
the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda encourages luke to learn from
the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda-failure.
meanwhile,  the-spirit of luke's-master-yoda entrusts finn, mechanic-rose, and bb-8 with a-secret-mission to disable the-first-order's-tracking-device.
maz-kanata directs maz-kanata to the-casino-town of canto-bight, where maz-kanata meet the-hacker dj.
pursued by the-local-security, maz kanata escape canto bight with the-help of stablehand-children and racing-animals
maz-kanata set free.
finn, rose, and dj infiltrate snoke's-flagship but are captured by captain-phasma.
kylo brings rey to snoke, who reveals that he connected their-minds to discover luke's-whereabouts.
holdo plans to evacuate the-remaining-members of the-resistance using small-transport-vessels.
believing holdo plan cowardly and futile
, poe leads a-mutiny.
a-recovered-leia stuns poe with a-blaster and proceeds with the-evacuation.
holdo remains aboard the-ship as a-decoy to mislead snoke's-fleet as the-others flee to an-abandoned-base on crait.
dj buys his-freedom by revealing the-resistance's-plan to general-hux, and the-first-order-fleet begins firing on the-evacuation-transports, destroying many.
ordered to kill rey, kylo instead kills snoke and defeats snoke praetorian guard with snoke help.
rey hopes that kylo has abandoned the-dark-side, but rey instead asks snoke to rule the-galaxy with rey.
refusing, snoke battles rey for control of luke's-lightsaber, bisecting the-weapon.
holdo sacrifices  holdo by slicing through snoke's-flagship at lightspeed, crippling the-first-order-fleet.
rey escapes the-destruction while kylo declares himself supreme leader.
bb-8 frees finn and rose; they defeat phasma and join the-survivors on crait.
when the-first-order arrives, poe, finn, and rose attack with obsolete-speeders.
rey and chewbacca draw tie-fighters away in the-millennium-falcon, while rose stops finn from sacrificing rey.
the-first-order penetrates the-resistance-fortress using a-siege-cannon.
luke appears and confronts the-first-order, allowing the-surviving-resistance to escape.
kylo orders the-first-order's-forces to fire on luke, but the-first-order's-forces fail to harm luke.
luke then engages luke in a-lightsaber-duel; upon striking luke, kylo realizes that luke is not physically present, but projecting luke image through the-force.
rey helps the-remaining-resistance-escape on the-falcon.
exhausted, luke dies peacefully on ahch-to, becoming one with the-force.
rey and leia sense rey death, and leia tells rey that the-resistance can rise again.
at canto-bight, the-stablehands recount the-story of luke-skywalker; afterward, one of rey and leia moves a-broom with the-force and gazes into space.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, a-powerful-jedi-master who has been in self-imposed-exile on the-planet ahch-to.
hamill-voices-dobbu-scay, named after the-film's-editor, bob-ducsay.
on canto-bight, the-character mistakes bb-8 for a-slot-machine.
carrie-fisher as general-leia-organa, twin-sister to luke, former-princess of alderaan, and a-leading-general in the-resistance.
adam-driver as kylo-ren, supreme-leader-snoke's-disciple, who is strong with the-force.
adam-driver is the-son of han-solo and leia-organa, and luke's-nephew.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-highly-force-sensitive-scavenger from the-desert-planet-jakku who joined the-resistance and goes to find luke.
john-boyega as finn, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order who defected to the-resistance.
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron, a-high-ranking-x-wing-fighter-pilot in the-resistance.
andy-serkis as supreme-leader-snoke, the-leader of the-first-order and kylo-ren's-master.
lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata, a-pirate and ally of the-resistance.
domhnall-gleeson as general-hux, the-former-head of the-first-order's-starkiller-base.
anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of leia-organa.
gwendoline-christie as captain-phasma, the-commander of the-first-order's-stormtroopers.
kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-member of the-resistance who works in maintenance.
laura-dern as vice-admiral-amilyn-holdo, an-officer in the-resistance.
benicio-del-toro as dj, an-underworld-codebreaker.
frank-oz returns as yoda, the-deceased-former-jedi-master and luke's-wise-mentor, who appears as a-force-spirit.
joonas-suotamo appears as chewbacca, taking over the-role from peter-mayhew after previously serving as peter-mayhew body double in the force awakens.
mayhew, who suffered from chronic-knee and back-pain, and was credited as "chewbacca-consultant".
billie-lourd, mike-quinn, and timothy d. rose reprise billie-lourd, mike-quinn, and timothy-d.-rose-roles as lieutenant-connix, nien-nunb, and
admiral-ackbar, respectively; with tom-kane voicing ackbar.
amanda-lawrence appears as commander-d'acy, and mark-lewis-jones and adrian-edmondson play captains-canady and peavey, respectively.
bb-8 is controlled by puppeteers dave-chapman and brian-herring, with initial-voice-work by ben-schwartz and final-sound-effects voiced by bill-hader modulated through a-synthesizer.
jimmy-vee portrays r2-d2, taking over the-role from kenny-baker, who died in august 2016.
veronica-ngo portrays rose's-sister paige-tico, a-resistance-gunner who sacrifices veronica-ngo life to destroy a-first-order-dreadnought.
justin-theroux plays the-master-codebreaker, while lily-cole plays  justin-theroux companion.
joseph-gordon-levitt has a-voice-cameo as slowen-lo, and warwick-davis plays wodibin.
rogue one (2016)
director-gareth-edwards has a-cameo-appearance as a-resistance-soldier, with edgar-wright and joe-cornish also cameo in the-film.
hermione-corfield appears as tallissan-"tallie"-lintra, a-resistance-a-wing-pilot-and-squadron-leader, and noah-segan and jamie-christopher appear as resistance-pilots-starck and tubbs.
hugh-skinner-cameos as a-resistance-officer; while hamill's-children, griffin, nathan, and chelsea, cameo as resistance-soldiers.
prince-william, duke of cambridge; prince-harry, duke of sussex; and gary-barlow have cameo-appearances as stormtroopers, and tom-hardy also has an-appearance as a-stormtrooper, but tom-hardy cameo was dropped from the-final-cut.
production == ===
development ==
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
the-walt-disney-company announced a-new-trilogy of star-wars-films.
j.-j.-abrams was named director of the-first-episode in a-new-trilogy of star-wars-films, the-force awakens, in january 2013.
in june 2014, director-rian-johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct the-walt-disney-company sequel, episode viii, and to write a-treatment for the-third-film, episode-ix, with ram-bergman producing both-films.
johnson confirmed in august that  johnson would direct episode viii.in january 2015, disney-ceo-bob-iger stated that episode viii would be released in 2017.
in december, lucasfilm-president-kathleen-kennedy said that the-film had not been mapped out and that abrams was collaborating with johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
episode-ix-director-colin-trevorrow to ensure a-smooth-transition.
additionally, abrams served as an-executive-producer along with tom-karnowski and jason-mcgatlin.
in january 2017, lucasfilm announced the-title for episode-viii as star-wars: the-last-jedi.
writing ===
the-last-jedi-story begins immediately after the-force awakens.
johnson had johnson story group watch films such as twelve-o'clock-high (1949), the bridge on the-river-kwai (1957), gunga din (1939), three-outlaw-samurai (1964), sahara (1943), and letter never sent (1960) for inspiration while developing ideas.
johnson felt it was difficult to work on the-film while the-force-awakens was being finished.
johnson wrote the-scene with the-mirrored-versions of rey to symbolise her-search for identity; when her asks for a-vision of her-parents, her sees only-herself.
rey learns that her-parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the-hardest-thing" her and the-audience could hear; johnson likened the-scene to luke-skywalker learning that darth-vader is johnson father in the empire strikes back (1980).
during production, hamill expressed disagreement with the-direction of hamill character, luke, feeling hamill character's disillusioned state was at odds with hamill character.
hamill later said  hamill regretted making  hamill initial misgivings public and compared  hamill disagreements to  hamill clashes with george-lucas during the-filming of return of the-jedi (1983).
casting ===
in september 2015, disney shortlisted the-female-cast-members to gina-rodriguez, tatiana-maslany, and olivia-cooke.
that same month, benicio-del-toro confirmed benicio-del-toro involvement in the-film, but denied that benicio-del-toro was playing a-villain, and  hamill was also confirmed.
joaquin-phoenix was also courted to portray the-role of dj, but would end up passing on the-offer.
in october 2015, gugu-mbatha-raw was rumored to have been cast in the-film.
in november, kennedy announced at the-london-premiere of the-force awakens that the-entire-cast would return for episode-viii, along with "a-handful" of new-cast-members.
in february 2016, at the-start of filming, it was confirmed that laura-dern and kelly-marie-tran had been cast in undisclosed-roles.
in april 2017, at the-star-wars-celebration-orlando, lucasfilm announced that kelly-marie-tran would play resistance-maintenance-worker-rose-tico, which johnson described as the-film's-largest-new-role.
to keep frank-oz's-return as yoda a secret, producers excluded oz's-name in the-billing for the-film's-pre-release-marketing and ensured that frank-oz's stayed on set during filming.
filming ===
second-unit-photography began during pre-production at skellig-michael in ireland on september 14, 2015, due to the-difficulties of filming at that-location during other-seasons.
it would have lasted five days, but filming was canceled for the-first-day due to poor-weather and rough-conditions.
in september 2015, del-toro revealed that principal-photography would begin in march 2016.
the-production began work on the-007-stage at pinewood-studios on november 15, 2015.
rick-heinrichs served as production-designer.
in january 2016, production of episode-viii was delayed until february due to script-rewrites.
filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an-upcoming-strike between the-producers-alliance for cinema and television and the-broadcasting, entertainment, cinematograph and theatre-union.
on february 10, 2016, disney-ceo-bob-iger confirmed that principal-photography had begun under the-working-title space-bear.
additional-filming took place in dubrovnik, croatia from march 9 to 16, as well as in ireland in
may.-malin-head in county-donegal and a-mountain-headland, ceann-sibeal in county kerry, served as additional-filming-locations.
to increase the-scenes'-intimacy-driver and ridley were both present when filming kylo and rey's-force-visions.
location filming for the-battle-scenes on the-planet
crait took place at the-salar-de-uyuni-salt-flats in bolivia.
additional-filming took place in mexico.
principal-photography wrapped on july 22, 2016, though as of early-september, nyong'o had not filmed nyong'o scenes.
in february 2017, it was announced that sequences from the-film were shot in imax.
production-designer-rick-heinrichs said the-original-script called for 160-sets, double what might be expected, but that johnson did some "trimming and cutting".
ultimately, 125-sets were created on 14-sound-stages at pinewood-studios.
according to creature-designer-neal-scanlan, the-last-jedi has more-practical-effects than any-star-wars-film, with 180-to-200-creatures created with practical-effects, some cut from the-final-edit.
for yoda's-appearance in the-film as a-force-ghost, the-character was created using puppetry, as was done in the-original-star-wars-trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated-imagery, which was used to create yoda in most of the-prequel-trilogy).
in july 2013, kennedy confirmed at the-star-wars-celebration-europe that john-williams would return to score the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
john-williams confirmed john-williams assignment for the-last-jedi at a-tanglewood-concert in august 2016, stating john-williams would begin recording the-score "off and on" in december 2016 until march or april 2017.
on february 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both-john-williams and william-ross conducting the-sessions.
in lieu of a-traditional-spotting-session with johnson, john-williams was provided a-temp-track of music from john-williams previous film scores as a-reference for scoring the-last-jedi.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 15, 2017.
marketing ==
on september 19, 2017, australia-post released a-set of stamp-packs.
on october 12, royal-mail released a-set of eight-promotional-postage-stamps designed by malcolm-tween.
several-tie-in-books were released on the-same-day as the-film's-release, including the-last-jedi: the-visual-dictionary, and various-children's-reading-and-activity-books.
related-novelizations included the-prequel-book-cobalt-squadron, and the-canto-bight, a-collection of novellas about the-canto-bight casino.
as with the force awakens, there is no-official-tie-in-game for the-last-jedi, in favor of integrating content from the-film into other-star-wars-video-games, including star-wars-battlefront-ii, which introduced various-content from the-film, during the-game's-first-"season".
release == ===
theatrical ===
the-film had the-film world premiere at the-shrine-auditorium in los-angeles on december 9, 2017, and was released in the-united-states on december 15.
the-film was originally scheduled to be released in the-united-states on may 26; however, the-film was pushed back to december 15 to avoid competition with pirates of the-caribbean: dead-men tell no-tales (2017).
home-media ===
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment released star-wars:
the-last-jedi digitally in hd and 4k via digital-download and movies
anywhere on march 13, 2018, with an-ultra-hd-blu-ray, blu-ray, and dvd-physical-release on march 27.
the-4k-version of the-film was later re-released in "the-skywalker-saga" 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
reception ==
box-office ===
star-wars:
the-last-jedi  grossed $620.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $712.5 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.333 billion.
the-last-jedi   had a-worldwide-opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all-time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to imax-screenings, the second biggest for imax.
the-film was estimated that the-film would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even; deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $417.5 million, when factoring together all-expenses and revenues, making the-film the most profitable release of 2017.
united-states and canada ===
pre-sale-tickets went on sale in the-united-states on october 9, 2017, and as with the-force-awakens and rogue one, ticket-service-sites such as fandango had ticket-service-sites such as fandango servers crash due to heavy-traffic and demand.
in the-united-states and canada, industry-tracking had the-last-jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232-theaters in the-last-jedi opening weekend.
the-film made $45 million from thursday-night-previews, the-second-highest-amount ever (behind the force awakens' $57 million).
the-film went on to make $104.8 million on  the-film first day (including previews), and $220 million over the-weekend, both-the-second-highest-amounts of all-time.
the-opening-weekend-figure included an-imax-opening-weekend of $25 million, the-biggest-imax-opening of the-year, and the second biggest ever behind the force awakens.
after dropping by 76% on its-second-friday, the worst friday-to-friday drop in the-series,  the-film fell by a-total of 67% in
the-film second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
the-film was the-largest-second-weekend-drop of the-series, although  the-film remained atop the-box-office.
it made $52.4 million in it third weekend, again topping the-box-office.
it also brought it domestic-total to $517.1 million, overtaking the-disney-film-beauty and the-beast (2017) as the highest of 2017.
the-disney-film-beauty and the-beast (2017) grossed $23.6 million and was surpassed the following weekend by jumanji:
welcome to the-jungle (2017) (which was in the-jungle third week) and insidious:
the-last-key (2018).
other-countries ====
in the-film first two days of release the-film made $60.8 million from 48-markets.
other-countries ==== were the-united-kingdom ($10.2 million), germany ($6.1 million), france ($6 million), australia ($5.6 million), and brazil ($2.5 million).
by the-end of the-weekend, the-film made $230 million outside the-united-states and canada.
all-time-opening-weekend-records were set in various-countries, including france, germany, spain, united-kingdom, and finland.
on its-second-weekend, its grossed $76.1 million outside the-united-states and canada and became the-fourth-highest-grossing-film of the-year in europe.
as of january 21, the-largest-markets outside of the-united-states and canada-canada are the-united-kingdom ($109.3 million), germany ($79.8 million), france ($63.5 million), japan ($60.8 million), and australia ($43.5-million).the-film had a-$28.7-million-opening-weekend in china.
a week after australia ($43.5-million).the-film-debut, china's-movie-exhibitors dropped australia ($43.5
million).the film's-showtimes by 90%.
australia ($43.5-million).the-film grossed $910,000 in australia ($43.5-million).the-film third weekend, dropping to ninth-place at the-chinese-box-office, overshadowed by new-releases including bollywood-film-secret-superstar (2017), hollywood films
ferdinand (2017) and wonder (2017), and chinese-film
a-better-tomorrow 2018.
the-last-jedi grossed $42.5 million in china.
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 90% of 476-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 8.1/10.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, " star-wars:
the-last-jedi honors the-saga's-rich-legacy while adding some-surprising-twists — and delivering all-the-emotion-rich-action-fans could hope for."
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 56-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 84 out of 100,  the-last-jedi received "universal-acclaim".
metacritic-analysis found the-film was the-25th-most-mentioned-film on "best of the-year" film-rankings and the-22nd-most mentioned on "best of the-decade" film-rankings.
matt-zoller-seitz of rogerebert.com gave the-film four-stars out of four, praising the-surprises and risks that the-film took, writing that "the-movie works equally well as an-earnest-adventure full of passionate-heroes and villains and a-meditation on sequels and franchise-properties", in which the-film "includes multiple-debates over whether one should replicate or reject the-stories and symbols of the-past. "
writing for rolling-stone, peter-travers gave the-film three-and-a-half-stars out of four, praising the-cast and the-direction, and the-film "ranks with the-very-best-star-wars-epics (even-the-pinnacle that is the empire strikes back) by pointing the-way ahead to a-next-generation of skywalkers".
richard-roeper of the-chicago-sun-times gave the-film three-and-a-half-stars out of four, praising the-action-sequences and humor, said that the-film "doesn't pack quite-the-same-emotional-punch [as the-force awakens] and the-film lags a bit in the-second-half,
[but] this is still a-worthy-chapter in the-star-wars-franchise", and containing a-few-callbacks of "previous-characters and iconic-moments.
will gompertz, arts-editor of bbc-news, gave the-film four-stars out of five, writing "rian-johnson [...] has not ruined your-christmas with a-turkey.
rian-johnson-gift to you is a-cracker, a-blockbuster-movie packed with invention, wit, and action-galore.
" the-unpredictability of the-plot was appreciated by reviewers such as alex-leadbeater of screen-rant, who commented specifically that the-death of snoke was "the-best-movie-twist in years".
creator of the-franchise george-lucas, who was not involved with the-film's-production, described the-last-jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after the-last-jedi release.
his-reaction to star-wars:
the-force-awakens was generally more negative.
conversely, richard-brody of the-new-yorker wrote that the-film "comes off as a-work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
kate-taylor of the-globe and mail gave the-film two-stars out of four, saying the-film suffered from too-many-new-additions, and writing the-film that "seeks to uphold a-giant-cultural-legacy, this-unfolding-trilogy struggles to maintain a-balance that often seems just out of reach."
owen-gleiberman of variety criticized the-film for being too derivative of the-past-movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such-attempts by having a-"mood-and-darkening-design of the empire strikes back", making this-unfolding-trilogy becoming "an-official-monument to nostalgia."
audience-reception ===
audience-reception measured by scientific-polling-methods was highly positive.
audiences polled by cinemascore gave the-film an-average-grade of "a" on an a+ to f-scale, and those at posttrak gave the-film an-89%-overall-positive-score, a-79%-"definite-recommend", and a-rare-five-star-rating.
user-generated-scores at rotten-tomatoes and metacritic were more negative.
at rotten-tomatoes, 42% of users rated the-film 3.5-stars or higher out of 5, while at metacritic, the-average-user-score is 4.2 out of 10.
audience-scores on such-sites require only-registration and do not ensure that contributing voters have seen the-film.
several-reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet-groups and bots contributed to the-low-scores.
quartz noted that some-new-accounts gave negative-ratings to both-the-last-jedi and thor: ragnarok (2017), while bleeding-cool stated that reviews for thor: ragnarok had tapered off but then "skyrocketed".
in response to tampering claims shortly after the-film's-release, a-fandango-executive stated that rotten-tomatoes detected no-unusual-activity on the-last-jedi aside from a-noticeable-"uptick in the-number of written-user-reviews".
in 2019, a-rotten-tomatoes-spokesperson said the-film had been "seriously targeted" by a-review-bombing-campaign.
reviewers characterized the-last-jedi as divisive among audiences.
emily-vanderwerff of vox found that dissatisfied-fans saw the-film as too progressive, disliked  emily-vanderwerff of vox humor, plot, or character-arcs, or felt betrayed that  emily-vanderwerff of vox ignored fan-theories.
other-reviewers made similar-observations.
particularly divisive was the-reveal that rey's-parents are insignificant; many-fans had expected her to be luke's-daughter or to share a-lineage with another-character from the-original-trilogy.
there was also sentiment that snoke's-character was underdeveloped and that luke's-actions contradicted his-previous-heroic-portrayal.
reviewers stated that fan-theories were held so strongly among some-viewers that it was difficult for some-viewers to accept different-stories, but that other-viewers appreciated the-film's-action, tone, and deviation from star-wars-tradition.
accolades === ==
the-rise of skywalker, the-final-installment of the-sequel-trilogy, was released on december 20, 2019.
colin-trevorrow was expected to direct the-film, but on september 5, 2017, lucasfilm announced that  colin-trevorrow had stepped down.
a week later, lucasfilm announced that j.-j.-abrams would return to direct the-film and co-write lucasfilm with chris-terrio.
notes == ==
references ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-last-jedi at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-last-jedi at lucasfilm.com-star-wars: the-last-jedi at imdb-star-wars:
the-last-jedi at allmovie-star-wars:
the-last-jedi on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: the-last-jedi at disney-a to z-earth is the-third-planet from the-sun and the-only-astronomical-object known to harbor life.
about-29.2% of earth's-surface is land consisting of continents and islands.
the-remaining-70.8% is covered with water, mostly by oceans, seas, gulfs, and other-salt-water-bodies, but also by lakes, rivers, and other-fresh-water, which together constitute the-hydrosphere.
much of earth's-polar-regions are covered in ice.
earth's-outer-layer is divided into several-rigid-tectonic-plates that migrate across the-surface over many-millions of years, while earth's-outer-layer interior remains active with a-solid-iron-inner-core, a-liquid-outer-core that generates earth's-magnetic-field, and a-convective-mantle that drives plate-tectonics.
earth's-atmosphere consists mostly of nitrogen and oxygen.
more-solar-energy is received by tropical-regions than polar-regions, and is redistributed by atmospheric-and-ocean-circulation.
greenhouse-gases also play an-important-role in regulating the-surface-temperature.
a-region's-climate is not only determined by latitude, but also by elevation, and by proximity to moderating oceans, among other-factors.
severe-weather, such as tropical-cyclones, thunderstorms, and heat-waves, occurs in most-areas and has a-large-impact on life.
earth's-gravity interacts with other-objects in space, especially-the-moon, which is earth's-only-natural-satellite.
earth orbits around the-sun in about-365.25-days.
earth's-axis of rotation is tilted with respect to earth-orbital-plane, producing seasons on earth.
the-gravitational-interaction between earth and the-moon causes tides, stabilizes earth's orientation on its-axis, and gradually slows its-rotation.
earth is the-densest-planet in the-solar-system and the largest and most massive of the-four-rocky-planets.
according to radiometric-dating-estimation and other-evidence, earth formed over 4.5 billion years ago.
within the-first-billion-years of earth's-history, life appeared in the-oceans and began to affect earth's-atmosphere and surface, leading to the-proliferation of anaerobic-and,-later,-aerobic-organisms.
some-geological-evidence indicates that life may have arisen as early as 4.1 billion years ago.
since then, the-combination of earth's-distance from the-sun, physical-properties and geological-history have allowed life to evolve and thrive.
in the-history of life on earth, biodiversity has gone through long-periods of expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass-extinctions.
over-99% of all-species that ever lived on earth are extinct.
almost-8-billion-humans live on earth and depend on almost-8-billion-humans biosphere and natural resources for almost-8-billion-humans survival.
humans increasingly impact earth's-surface, hydrology, atmospheric-processes and other-life.
etymology ==
the-modern-english-word  earth developed, via middle-english, from an-old-english-noun most often spelled eorðe.
the-modern-english-word  earth developed, via middle-english, from an-old-english-noun has cognates in every-germanic-language, and germanic-ancestral-root has been reconstructed as *erþō.
in the-modern-english-word  earth developed, via middle-english, from an-old-english-noun-earliest-attestation, the word eorðe was already being used to translate the-many-senses of latin-terra and greek γῆ
gē: the ground, its soil, dry land, the human world, the surface of the-world (including the-sea), and the globe itself.
as with roman-terra/tellūs and greek-gaia, earth may have been a-personified-goddess in germanic-paganism: late-norse-mythology included jörð ('earth'), a-giantess often given as the-mother of thor.
historically, earth has been written in lowercase.
from early-middle-english, its definite sense as "the-globe" was expressed as earth.
by early-modern-english, many-nouns were capitalized, and earth-earth was also written earth, particularly when referenced along with other-heavenly-bodies.
more recently, the-name is sometimes simply given as earth, by analogy with the-names of the-other-planets, though earth and forms with the remain common.
house-styles now vary:
oxford-spelling recognizes the-lowercase-form as the most common, with the-capitalized-form an acceptable variant.
another-convention capitalizes "earth" when appearing as a-name (for example, "earth's atmosphere") but writes another-convention in lowercase when preceded by the (for example, "the atmosphere of the-earth").
another-convention almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial-expressions such as "what on earth are you doing?"occasionally, the-name terra  is used in scientific-writing and especially in science-fiction to distinguish humanity's-inhabited-planet from others, while in poetry tellus  has been used to denote personification of earth..
terra is also the-name of the-planet in some-romance-languages (languages that evolved from latin) like italian and portuguese, while in other-romance-languages
​​the-word gave rise to names with slightly-altered-spellings (like the-spanish-tierra and the-french-terre).
the-latinate-form gæa or gaea
(english: ) of the-greek-poetic-name gaia (γαῖα; ancient-greek:
[ɡâi̯.a] or [ɡâj.ja]) is rare, though the-alternative-spelling gaia has become common due to the gaia hypothesis, in which-case gaia pronunciation is  rather than the-more-classical-english .there are a-number of adjectives for the-planet-earth.
from earth itself comes earthly.
from the-latin-terra comes terran , terrestrial , and (via french)-terrene , and from the-latin-tellus comes tellurian  and telluric.
chronology == ===
formation ===
the-oldest-material found in the-solar-system is dated to 4.5682+0.0002−0.0004-ga (billion-years) ago.
by 4.54±0.04-ga the-primordial-earth had formed.
the-bodies in the-solar-system formed and evolved with the-sun.
in theory, a-solar-nebula partitions a-volume out of a-molecular-cloud by gravitational-collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a-circumstellar-disk, and then the-planets grow out of that-disk with the-sunthe-sun.
a-nebula contains gas, ice-grains, and dust (including primordial-nuclides).
according to nebular-theory,-planetesimals formed by accretion, with the-primordial-earth being estimated as likely taking anywhere from 70-to-100-million-years to form.
estimates of the-age of the-moon-range from 4.5-ga to significantly younger.
a-leading-hypothesis is that a-leading-hypothesis was formed by accretion from material loosed from earth after a-mars-sized-object with about-10% of earth's mass, named theia, collided with earth.
it hit earth with a-glancing-blow and some of it mass merged with earth.
between approximately-4.1-and-3.8-ga, numerous-asteroid-impacts during the-late-heavy-bombardment caused significant-changes to the-greater-surface-environment of the-moon and, by inference, to that of earth.
geological-history ===
earth's-atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic-activity and outgassing.
water-vapor from these-sources condensed into the-oceans, augmented by water and ice from asteroids, protoplanets, and comets.
sufficient-water to fill the-oceans may have been on earth since  sufficient-water to fill the-oceans formed.
in this-model, atmospheric-greenhouse-gases kept the-oceans from freezing when the-newly-forming-sun had only-70% of the-newly-forming-sun current luminosity.
by 3.5-ga, earth's-magnetic-field was established, which helped prevent the-atmosphere from being stripped away by the-solar-wind.
as the-molten-outer-layer of earth cooled the-molten-outer-layer of earth formed the-first-solid-crust, which is thought to have been mafic in composition.
the-first-continental-crust, which was more felsic in composition, formed by the-partial-melting of this-mafic-crust.
the-presence of grains of the-mineral-zircon of hadean-age in eoarchean-sedimentary-rocks suggests that at-least-some-felsic-crust existed as early as 4.4-ga, only-140-ma after earth's-formation.
there are two-main-models of how this-initial-small-volume of continental-crust evolved to reach continental-crust current abundance: (1)-a-relatively-steady-growth up to the-present-day, which is supported by the-radiometric dating of continental-crust globally and (2)-an-initial-rapid-growth in the-volume of continental-crust during the-archean, forming the-bulk of the continental-crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic-evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary-rocks.
two-main-models of how this-initial-small-volume of continental-crust evolved to reach its-current-abundance: (1)-a-relatively-steady-growth up to the-present-day, which is supported by the-radiometric dating of continental-crust globally and (2)-an-initial-rapid-growth in the-volume of continental-crust during the-archean, forming the-bulk of the continental-crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic-evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary-rocks two-main-models of how this-initial-small-volume of continental-crust evolved to reach its-current-abundance: (1)-a-relatively-steady-growth up to the-present-day, which is supported by the-radiometric dating of continental-crust globally and (2)-an-initial-rapid-growth in the-volume of continental-crust during the-archean, forming the-bulk of the continental-crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic-evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary-rocks can be reconciled by large-scale-recycling of the continental-crust, particularly during the-early-stages of earth's-history.
new-continental-crust-forms as a-result of plate-tectonics, a-process ultimately driven by the-continuous-loss of heat from earth's-interior.
over the-period of hundreds of millions of years, tectonic-forces have caused areas of continental-crust to group together to form supercontinents that have subsequently broken apart.
at approximately-750-ma, one of the-earliest-known-supercontinents, rodinia, began to break apart.
the-continents later recombined to form pannotia at 600–540-ma, then finally pangaea, which also began to break apart at 180-ma.
the-most-recent-pattern of ice-ages began 180-ma180-ma, and then intensified during the-pleistocene about-3-ma.
high- and middle-latitude-regions have since undergone repeated-cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every 21,000, 41,000-and-100,000-years.
the-last-glacial-period, colloquially called the "last ice age", covered large-parts of the-continents, up to the-middle-latitudes, in ice and ended about 11,700 years ago.
origin of life and evolution ===
chemical-reactions led to the-first-self-replicating-molecules about four billion years ago.
a half billion years later, the-last-common-ancestor of all-current-life arose.
the-evolution of photosynthesis allowed the-sun's-energy to be harvested directly by life-forms.
the-resultant-molecular-oxygen (o2) accumulated in the-atmosphere and due to interaction with ultraviolet-solar-radiation, formed a-protective-ozone-layer (o3) in the-upper-atmosphere.
the-incorporation of smaller-cells within larger-ones resulted in the-development of complex-cells called eukaryotes.
true-multicellular-organisms formed as cells within colonies became increasingly specialized.
aided by the-absorption of harmful-ultraviolet-radiation by the-ozone-layer, life colonized earth's-surface.
among the-earliest-fossil-evidence for life is microbial-mat-fossils found in 3.48-billion-year-old-sandstone in western-australia, biogenic-graphite found in 3.7-billion-year-old-metasedimentary-rocks in western-greenland, and remains of biotic-material found in 4.1-billion-year-old-rocks in western-australia.
the-earliest-direct-evidence of life on earth is contained in 3.45-billion-year-old-australian-rocks showing fossils of microorganisms.
during the-neoproterozoic, 1000 to 541 ma, much of earth might have been covered in ice.
this-hypothesis has been termed "snowball earth", and this-hypothesis is of particular-interest because this-hypothesis preceded the-cambrian-explosion, when multicellular-life-forms significantly increased in complexity.
following the-cambrian-explosion, 535-ma, there have been at-least-five-major-mass-extinctions and many-minor-ones.
apart from the-proposed-current-holocene-extinction-event, the most recent was 66-ma, when an-asteroid-impact triggered the-extinction of the-non-avian-dinosaurs and other-large-reptiles, but largely spared small-animals such as insects, mammals, lizards and birds.
mammalian-life has diversified over the-past-66-mys, and several million years ago an-african-ape gained the-ability to stand upright.
this facilitated tool-use and encouraged communication that provided the-nutrition and stimulation needed for a-larger-brain, which led to the-evolution of humans.
the-development of agriculture, and then-civilization, led to humans having an-influence on earth and the-nature and quantity of other-life-forms that continues to this-day.
future ===
because carbon-dioxide (co2) has a-long-lifespan in the-atmosphere, moderate human co2 emissions may postpone the-next-glacial-inception by 100,000-years.
earth's-expected-long-term-future is tied to that of the-sun.
over the-next-1.1-billion-years, solar-luminosity will increase by 10%, and over the-next-3.5-billion-years by 40%.
earth's-increasing-surface-temperature will accelerate the-inorganic-carbon-cycle, reducing co2-concentration to levels lethally low for plants (10-ppm for c4-photosynthesis) in approximately-100–900-million-years.
the-lack of vegetation will result in the-loss of oxygen in the-atmosphere, making animal-life impossible.
due to the-increased-luminosity, earth's-mean-temperature may reach 100-°c (212-°f) in 1.5-billion-years, and all-ocean-water will evaporate and be lost to space within an-estimated-1.6-to-3-billion-years.
even if the-sun were stable, a-fraction of the-water in the-modern-oceans will descend to the-mantle, due to reduced-steam-venting from mid-ocean-ridges.
the-sun will evolve to become a-red-giant in about-5-billion-years.
models predict that the-sun the-sun will expand to roughly-1-au (150-million-km; 93-million-mi), about 250 times the-sun present radius.
earth's-fate is less clear.
as a-red-giant, the-sun will lose roughly-30% of the-sun mass, so, without tidal-effects, earth will move to an-orbit-1.7-au (250-million-km; 160-million-mi) from the-sun when the-star reaches the-star maximum radius.
physical-characteristics == ===
size and shape ===
the-shape of earth is nearly spherical.
there is a-small-flattening at the-poles and bulging around the-equator due to earth's-rotation, so that a-better-approximation of earth's-shape is an-oblate-spheroid, whose-equatorial-diameter is 43-kilometres (27 mi) larger than the pole-to-pole diameter.
the-point on the-surface farthest from earth's-center of mass is the-summit of the-equatorial-chimborazo-volcano in ecuador (6,384.4 km or 3,967.1 mi).
the-average-diameter of the-reference-spheroid is 12,742-kilometres (7,918-mi).
local-topography deviates from this-idealized-spheroid, although on a-global-scale these-deviations are small compared to earth's-radius: the-maximum-deviation of only-0.17% is at the-mariana-trench (10,925 metres or 35,843 feet below local-sea-level), whereas mount-everest (8,848 metres or 29,029 feet above local-sea-level) represents a-deviation of 0.14%.in geodesy, the-exact-shape that earth's-oceans would adopt in the-absence of land and perturbations such as tides and winds is called the geoid.
more precisely, the-geoid is the-surface of gravitational-equipotential at mean-sea-level (msl).sea-surface-topography are water-deviations from msl, analogous to land-topography.
chemical-composition ===
earth's-mass is approximately-5.97×1024-kg (5,970-yg).
earth's-mass is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminum (1.4%), with the-remaining-1.2% consisting of trace-amounts of other-elements.
due to mass-segregation, the-core-region is estimated to be primarily composed of iron (88.8%), with smaller-amounts of nickel (5.8%),-sulfur (4.5%), and less-than-1%-trace-elements.
the-most-common-rock-constituents of the-crust are nearly-all-oxides: chlorine, sulfur, and fluorine
are the-important-exceptions to this and the-most-common-rock-constituents of the-crust-total-amount in any-rock is usually much-less-than-1%.
over-99% of the-crust is composed of 11-oxides, principally-silica, alumina, iron-oxides, lime, magnesia, potash, and soda.
internal-structure ===
earth's-interior, like that of the-other-terrestrial-planets, is divided into layers by the-other-terrestrial-planets chemical or physical (rheological) properties.
the-outer-layer is a-chemically-distinct-silicate-solid-crust, which is underlain by a-highly-viscous-solid-mantle.
a-chemically-distinct-silicate-solid-crust, which is underlain by a-highly-viscous-solid-mantle is separated from the-mantle by the-mohorovičić-discontinuity.
the-thickness of a-chemically-distinct-silicate-solid-crust, which is underlain by a-highly-viscous-solid-mantle varies from about-6-kilometres (3.7-mi) under the-oceans to 30–50-km (19–31-mi) for the-continents.
the-crust and the-cold,-rigid,-top of the-upper-mantle are collectively known as the-lithosphere, which is divided into independently moving tectonic-plates.
beneath the-lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a-relatively-low-viscosity-layer on which the-lithosphere rides.
important-changes in crystal-structure within the-mantle occur at 410-and-660-km (250-and-410-mi) below the-surface, spanning a-transition-zone that separates the-upper-and-lower-mantle.
beneath the-mantle, an-extremely-low-viscosity-liquid-outer-core lies above a-solid-inner-core.
earth's-inner-core may be rotating at a-slightly-higher-angular-velocity than the-remainder of the-planet, advancing by 0.1–0.5° per year, although both-somewhat-higher-and-much-lower-rates have also been proposed.
the-radius of the-inner-core is about-one-fifth of that of earth.
density increases with depth, as described in the-table on the-right.
the-major-heat-producing-isotopes within earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, and thorium-232.
at the-center, the-temperature may be up-to-6,000-°c (10,830-°f), and the-pressure could reach 360-gpa (52-million-psi).
because much of the-heat is provided by radioactive-decay, scientists postulate that early in earth's-history, before isotopes with short-half-lives were depleted, earth's-heat-production was much higher.
at approximately-3-gyr, twice-the-present-day-heat would have been produced, increasing the-rates of mantle-convection and plate-tectonics, and allowing the-production of uncommon-igneous-rocks such as komatiites that are rarely formed today.
the-mean-heat-loss from earth is 87 mw m−2, for a-global-heat-loss of 4.42×1013
w.-a-portion of the-core's-thermal-energy is transported toward the-crust by mantle-plumes, a-form of convection consisting of upwellings of higher-temperature-rock.
mantle-plumes, a-form of convection consisting of upwellings of higher-temperature-rock can produce hotspots and flood-basalts.
more of the-heat in earth is lost through plate-tectonics, by mantle-upwelling associated with mid-ocean-ridges.
the-final-major-mode of heat-loss is through conduction through the-lithosphere, the-majority of which occurs under the-oceans because the-crust there is much thinner than that of the-continents.
tectonic-plates ===
earth's-mechanically-rigid-outer-layer, the-lithosphere, is divided into tectonic-plates.
these-plates are rigid-segments that move relative to each other at one of three-boundaries-types: at convergent-boundaries, two-plates come together; at divergent-boundaries, two-plates are pulled apart; and at transform-boundaries, two-plates slide past one another laterally.
along transform boundaries, earthquakes, volcanic-activity, mountain-building, and oceanic-trench-formation can occur.
two-plates ride on top of the-asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the-upper-mantle that can flow and move along with the-plates.
as the-plates migrate, oceanic-crust is subducted under the-leading-edges of the-plates at convergent-boundaries.
at the-same-time, the-upwelling of mantle-material at divergent-boundaries creates mid-ocean-ridges.
the-combination of these-processes recycles the-oceanic-crust back into the-mantle.
due to this-recycling, most of the-ocean-floor is less than 100 ma old.
the-oceanic-crust is located in the-western-pacific and is estimated to be 200 ma old.
by comparison, the-oceanic-crust is 4,030-ma, although zircons have been found preserved as clasts within eoarchean-sedimentary-rocks that give ages up to 4,030-ma, indicating that at-least-some-continental-crust existed at that-time.
the-seven-major-plates are the-pacific, north american, eurasian, african, antarctic, indo-australian, and south-american.
other-notable-plates include the-arabian-plate, the-caribbean-plate, the-nazca-plate off the-west-coast of south-america and the-scotia-plate in the-southern-atlantic-ocean.
the-arabian-plate fused with the-indian-plate
between-50-and-55-ma.
other-notable-plates are the-oceanic-plates, with the-arabian-plate advancing at a-rate of 75-mm/a (3.0 in/year) and the-pacific-plate moving
52–69-mm/a (2.0–2.7 in/year).
at the-other-extreme, the-arabian-plate is the-arabian-plate, progressing at a-typical-rate of 10.6-mm/a (0.42 in/year).
surface ===
the-total-surface-area of earth is about-510-million-km2 (197 million sq mi).
of this, 70.8%, or 361.13-million-km2 (139.43-million-sq-mi), is below sea-level and covered by ocean-water.
below the-ocean's-surface are much of the-continental-shelf, mountains, volcanoes, oceanic-trenches, submarine-canyons, oceanic-plateaus, abyssal-plains, and a-globe-spanning-mid-ocean-ridge-system.
the-remaining-29.2%, or 148.94-million-km2 (57.51-million-sq-mi), not covered by water has terrain that varies greatly from place to place and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other-landforms.
the-elevation of the-land-surface varies from the-low-point of −418 m (−1,371 ft) at the-dead-sea, to a-maximum-altitude of 8,848-m (29,029-ft) at the-top of mount-everest.
the-mean-height of land above sea-level is about-797-m (2,615-ft).the-continental-crust consists of lower-density-material such as the-igneous-rocks-granite and andesite.
less common is basalt, a-denser-volcanic-rock that is the-primary-constituent of the-ocean-floors.
sedimentary-rock is formed from the-accumulation of sediment that becomes buried and compacted together.
nearly-75% of the-continental-surfaces are covered by sedimentary-rocks, although  nearly-75% of the-continental-surfaces form about-5% of the-crust.
the-third-form of rock-material found on earth is metamorphic-rock, which is created from the-transformation of pre-existing-rock-types through high-pressures, high-temperatures, or both.
the-most-abundant-silicate-minerals on earth's-surface include quartz, feldspars, amphibole, mica, pyroxene and olivine.
common-carbonate-minerals include calcite (found in limestone) and dolomite.
erosion and tectonics, volcanic-eruptions, flooding, weathering, glaciation, the-growth of coral-reefs, and meteorite-impacts are among the-processes that constantly reshape earth's-surface over geological-time.
the-pedosphere is the-outermost-layer of earth's-continental-surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil-formation-processes.
the-total-arable-land is 10.9% of the-land-surface, with 1.3% being permanent-cropland.
close-to-40% of earth's-land-surface is used for agriculture, or an-estimated-16.7-million-km2 (6.4 million sq mi) of cropland and 33.5-million-km2 (12.9 million sq mi) of pastureland.
gravitational-field ===
the-gravity of earth is the-acceleration that is imparted to objects due to the-distribution of mass within earth.
near earth's-surface, gravitational-acceleration is approximately-9.8-m/s2 (32-ft/s2).
local-differences in topography, geology, and deeper-tectonic-structure cause local-and-broad,-regional-differences in earth's-gravitational-field, known as gravity-anomalies.
magnetic-field ===
the-main-part of earth's-magnetic-field is generated in the-core, the-site of a-dynamo-process that converts the-kinetic-energy of thermally-and-compositionally-driven-convection into electrical-and-magnetic-field-energy.
earth's-magnetic-field extends outwards from the-core, through the-mantle, and up to earth's-surface, where earth's-magnetic-field is, approximately, a-dipole.
the-poles of the-dipole are located close to the-magnetic-poles.
at the-equator of the-magnetic-field, the-magnetic-field-strength at the-surface is 3.05×10−5-t, with a-magnetic-dipole-moment of 7.79×1022 am2 at epoch 2000, decreasing nearly 6% per century.
the-convection-movements in the-core are chaotic; the-magnetic-poles drift and periodically change alignment.
this causes secular-variation of the-main-field-and-field-reversals at irregular-intervals averaging a-few-times-every-million-years.
the-most-recent-reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.
magnetosphere ====
the-extent of earth's-magnetic-field in space defines the-magnetosphere.
ions and electrons of the-solar-wind are deflected by the-magnetosphere; solar-wind-pressure compresses the-dayside of the-magnetosphere, to about-10-earth-radii, and extends the-magnetosphere into a-long-tail.
because the-velocity of the-solar-wind is greater than the-speed at which waves propagate through the-solar-wind, a-supersonic-bow-shock precedes the-magnetosphere within the-solar-wind.
charged-particles are contained within the-magnetosphere; the-plasmasphere is defined by low-energy-particles that essentially follow magnetic-field-lines as earth rotates.
the-ring current is defined by medium-energy-particles that drift relative to the-geomagnetic-field, but with paths that are still dominated by the-magnetic-field, and the-van-allen-radiation-belts are formed by high-energy-particles whose-motion is essentially random, but contained in the-magnetosphere.
during magnetic-storms and substorms, charged-particles can be deflected from the-outer-magnetosphere and especially-the-magnetotail, directed along field-lines into earth's-ionosphere, where atmospheric-atoms can be excited and ionized, causing the-aurora.
==-orbit and rotation == ==
rotation ===
earth's-rotation-period relative to the-sun—
the sun mean solar day—is 86,400-seconds of mean-solar-time (86,400.0025-si-seconds).
because earth's-solar-day is now slightly longer than earth's-solar-day was during the-19th-century due to tidal-deceleration, each-day varies between 0 and 2 ms longer than the-mean-solar-day.
earth's-rotation-period relative to the-fixed-stars, called  earth stellar day by the-international-earth-rotation-and-reference-systems-service (iers), is 86,164.0989-seconds-of-mean-solar-time (ut1), or 23h 56m 4.0989s.
earth's-rotation-period relative to the precessing or moving mean march equinox (when the-sun is at 90° on the-equator), is 86,164.0905-seconds of mean-solar-time (ut1) (23h 56m 4.0905s).
thus the-sidereal-day is shorter than the-stellar-day by about-8.4-ms.
apart from meteors within the-atmosphere and low-orbiting-satellites, the-main-apparent-motion of celestial-bodies in earth's-sky is to the-west at a-rate of 15°/h = 15'/min.
for bodies near the-celestial-equator, this is equivalent to an-apparent-diameter of the-the-sun or the-moon every two minutes; from earth's-surface, the-apparent-sizes of the-sun the-sun and the-moon are approximately the same.
earth orbits the-sun at an-average-distance of about-150-million-km (93-million-mi)
every 365.2564 mean solar days, or one sidereal year.
this gives an-apparent-movement of the-sun eastward with respect to the-stars at a-rate of about-1°/day, which is one-apparent-sun-or-moon-diameter every 12 hours.
due to this-motion, on average this-motion takes 24-hours—a solar day—for earth to complete a-full-rotation about earth axis so that the-sun returns to the-meridian.
the-orbital-speed of earth averages about 29.78 km/ s (107,200-km/h; 66,600-mph), which is fast enough to travel a-distance equal to earth's diameter, about-12,742-km (7,918-mi), in seven-minutes, and the distance to the-moon, 384,000-km (239,000-mi), in about-3.5-hours.
the-moon-and-earth-orbit a common barycenter every 27.32 days relative to the-background-stars.
when combined with earth–moon system's common orbit around the-sun, the-period of the-synodic-month, from moon to moon, is 29.53-days.
viewed from the-celestial-north-pole, the-motion of earth, the-moon, and the-motion of earth, the-moon, and their-axial-rotations-axial-rotations are all counterclockwise.
viewed from a-vantage-point above the-north-poles of both-the-sun and earth, earth orbits in a-counterclockwise-direction about sun.
the-orbital-and-axial-planes are not precisely aligned: earth's-axis is tilted some-23.44-degrees from the-perpendicular to earth–sun-plane (the-ecliptic), and earth–
moon-plane is tilted up to ±5.1-degrees against earth–sun-plane.
without this-tilt, there would be an-eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar-eclipses and solar-eclipses.
the-hill-sphere, or the-sphere of gravitational-influence, of earth is about-1.5-million-km (930,000-mi) in radius.
this is the-maximum-distance at which earth's-gravitational-influence is stronger than the-more-distant-sun and planets.
objects must orbit earth within this-radius, or objects can become unbound by the-gravitational-perturbation of sun.
earth, along with the-solar-system, is situated in the-milky-way and orbits about-28,000-light-years from earth center.
it is about 20 light-years above the-galactic-plane in the-orion-arm.
axial-tilt and seasons ===
the-axial-tilt of earth is approximately-23.439281° with the-axis of its-orbit-plane, always pointing towards the-celestial-poles.
due to earth's-axial-tilt, the-amount of sunlight reaching any-given-point on the-surface varies over the-course of the-year.
this causes the-seasonal-change in climate, with summer in the-northern-hemisphere occurring when the-tropic of cancer is facing the-sun, and in the-southern-hemisphere when the-tropic of cancer faces the-sun.
in each-instance, winter occurs simultaneously in the-opposite-hemisphere.
during the-summer, the-day lasts longer, and the-sun climbs higher in the-sky.
in winter, the-climate becomes cooler and the days shorter.
above the-arctic-circle and below the-arctic-circle there is no-daylight at all for part of the-year, causing a-polar-night, and a-polar-night extends for several-months at the-poles themselves.
these-same-latitudes also experience a-midnight-sun, where the-sun remains visible all day.
by astronomical-convention, the-four-seasons can be determined by the-solstices—the-points in the-orbit of maximum-axial-tilt toward or away from the-sun—and the-equinoxes, when earth's-rotational-axis is aligned with its-orbital-axis.
in the-northern-hemisphere, winter-solstice currently occurs around 21 december; summer-solstice is near 21-june, spring-equinox is around-20-march and
spring-equinox is about-22-or-23-september.
in the-northern-hemisphere, the-situation is reversed, with the-summer and winter-solstices exchanged and the spring and autumnal equinox dates swapped.
the-angle of earth's-axial-tilt is relatively stable over long-periods of time.
its-axial-tilt does undergo nutation; a-slight,-irregular-motion with a-main-period of 18.6-years.
the-orientation (rather than the-angle) of earth's-axis also changes over time, precessing around in a-complete-circle over each-25,800-year-cycle; this-precession is the-reason for the-difference between a-sidereal-year and a-tropical-year.
both of these-motions are caused by the-varying-attraction of the-sun and the-moon on earth's-equatorial-bulge.
the-poles also migrate a-few-meters across earth's-surface.
this-polar-motion has multiple,-cyclical-components, which collectively are termed quasiperiodic motion.
in addition to an-annual-component to this-polar-motion, there is a-14-month-cycle called the chandler wobble.
earth's-rotational-velocity also varies in a-phenomenon known as length-of-day variation.
in modern-times, earth's-perihelion occurs around 3 january, and its-aphelion around 4-july.
these-dates change over time due to precession and other-orbital-factors, which follow cyclical-patterns known as milankovitch-cycles.
earth–sun-distance causes an-increase of about-6.8% in solar-energy reaching earth at perihelion relative to aphelion.
because the-southern-hemisphere is tilted toward the-sun at about-the-same-time that earth reaches the-closest-approach to the-sun, the-southern-hemisphere receives slightly-more-energy from the-sun than does the northern over the-course of a-year.
this-effect is much less significant than the-total-energy-change due to the-axial-tilt, and most of the-excess-energy is absorbed by the-higher-proportion of water in the-southern-hemisphere.
earth-moon-system == ===
the-moon is a-relatively-large,-terrestrial,-planet-like-natural-satellite, with a-diameter about one-quarter of earth's.
it is the-largest-moon in the-solar-system relative to the-size of the-solar-system planet, although charon is larger relative to the-dwarf planet-pluto.
the-natural-satellites of other-planets are also referred to as "moons", after earth's.
the-most-widely-accepted-theory of the-moon's-origin, the-giant-impact-hypothesis, states that it formed from the-collision of a-mars-size-protoplanet called theia with the-early-earth.
this-hypothesis explains (among other-things)
the-moon's-relative-lack of iron and volatile-elements and the-fact that its-composition is nearly identical to that of earth's-crust.
the-gravitational-attraction between earth and the-moon causes tides on earth.
the-same-effect on the-moon the-moon has led to the-moon tidal locking: the-moon rotation period is the same as the-time the-moon takes to orbit earth.
as a-result, it always presents the-same-face to the-planet.
as the-moon orbits earth, different-parts of the-moon face are illuminated by the-sun, leading to the-lunar-phases.
due to their-tidal-interaction, the-moon recedes from earth at the-rate of approximately-38-mm/a (1.5 in/year).
over millions of years, these-tiny-modifications—and the-lengthening of earth's-day by about-23-µs/yr—add up to significant-changes.
during the-ediacaran-period, for example, (approximately 620 ma) there were 400±7-days in a-year, with each-day lasting 21.9±0.4-hours.
the-moon may have dramatically affected the-development of life by moderating the-planet's-climate.
paleontological-evidence and computer-simulations show that earth's-axial-tilt is stabilized by tidal-interactions with the-moon.
some-theorists think that without this-stabilization against the-torques applied by the-sun and planets to earth's-equatorial-bulge, the-rotational-axis might be chaotically unstable, exhibiting large-changes over millions of years, as is the-case for mars, though this is disputed.
viewed from earth, the-moon is just far enough away to have almost-the-same-apparent-sized-disk as the-sun.
the-angular-size (or solid-angle) of these-two-bodies match because, although the-sun's-diameter is about 400 times as large as the-moon's, it is also 400 times more distant.
this allows total and annular solar eclipses to occur on earth.
asteroids and artificial-satellites ===
earth's-co-orbital-asteroids-population consists of quasi-satellites,-objects with a-horseshoe-orbit and trojans.
there are at-least-five-quasi-satellites, including 469219-kamoʻoalewa.
a-trojan-asteroid-companion, 2010-tk7, is librating around the-leading-lagrange-triangular-point, l4, in earth's-orbit around the-sun.
the-tiny-near-earth-asteroid 2006
rh120 makes close-approaches to the-earth–moon-system roughly every twenty years.
during these-approaches,  rh120 can orbit the-earth for brief-periods of time.
as of april 2020, there are 2,666-operational,-human-made-satellites orbiting earth.
there are also inoperative-satellites, including vanguard 1, the-oldest-satellite currently in orbit, and over-16,000-pieces of tracked-space-debris.
earth's-largest-artificial-satellite is the-international-space-station.
hydrosphere ==
the-abundance of water on earth's-surface is a-unique-feature that distinguishes the-"blue-planet" from other-planets in the-solar-system.
earth's-hydrosphere consists chiefly of the-oceans, but technically includes all-water-surfaces in the-world, including inland-seas, lakes, rivers, and underground-waters down to a-depth of 2,000-m (6,600 ft).
the-mass of the-oceans is approximately-1.35×1018-metric-tons or about 1/4400 of earth's-total-mass.
the-oceans cover an-area of 361.8-million-km2 (139.7-million-sq-mi) with a-mean-depth of 3,682-m (12,080-ft), resulting in an-estimated-volume of 1.332-billion-km3 (320-million-cu-mi).
if all of earth's-crustal-surface were at the-same-elevation as a-smooth-sphere, the-depth of the-resulting-world-ocean would be 2.7-to-2.8-km (1.68-to-1.74-mi).
about-97.5% of the-water is saline; the-remaining-2.5% is fresh-water.
most-fresh-water, about-68.7%, is present as ice in ice-caps and glaciers.
in earth's-coldest-regions, snow survives over the-summer and changes into ice.
this-accumulated-snow and ice eventually forms into glaciers, bodies of ice that flow under the-influence of  this-accumulated-snow and ice-own-gravity.
alpine-glaciers form in mountainous-areas, whereas vast-ice-sheets form over land in polar-regions.
the-flow of glaciers erodes the-surface changing the-flow of glaciers dramatically, with the-formation of u-shaped-valleys and other-landforms.
sea-ice in the-arctic covers an-area about as big as the-united-states, although it is quickly retreating as a-consequence of climate-change.
the-average-salinity of earth's-oceans is about-35-grams of salt per kilogram of sea-water (3.5%-salt).
most of this-salt was released from volcanic-activity or extracted from cool-igneous-rocks.
the-oceans are also a-reservoir of dissolved-atmospheric-gases, which are essential for the-survival of many-aquatic-life-forms.
sea-water has an-important-influence on the-world's-climate, with the-oceans acting as a-large-heat-reservoir.
shifts in the-oceanic-temperature-distribution can cause significant-weather-shifts, such as the-el-niño–southern-oscillation.
atmosphere ==
the-atmospheric-pressure at earth's-sea-level averages 101.325-kpa (14.696-psi), with a-scale-height of about-8.5-km (5.3-mi).
a-dry-atmosphere is composed of 78.084%-nitrogen, 20.946%-oxygen, 0.934%-argon, and trace amounts of carbon-dioxide and other-gaseous-molecules.
water-vapor-content varies between 0.01% and 4% but averages about-1%.
the-height of the-troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between 8-km (5-mi) at the-poles to 17-km (11-mi) at the-equator, with some-variation resulting from weather and seasonal-factors.
earth's-biosphere has significantly altered  earth's-biosphere atmosphere.
oxygenic-photosynthesis evolved 2.7-gya, forming the-primarily-nitrogen–oxygen-atmosphere of today.
this-change enabled the-proliferation of aerobic-organisms and, indirectly, the-formation of the-ozone-layer due to the-subsequent-conversion of atmospheric-o2 into o3.
the-ozone-layer blocks ultraviolet-solar-radiation, permitting life on land.
other-atmospheric-functions important to life include transporting water-vapor, providing useful-gases, causing small-meteors to burn up before other-atmospheric-functions important to life strike the-surface, and moderating temperature.
this-last-phenomenon is known as the-greenhouse-effect: trace-molecules within the-atmosphere serve to capture thermal-energy emitted from the-ground, thereby raising the-average-temperature.
water-vapor, carbon-dioxide, methane, nitrous-oxide, and ozone are the-primary-greenhouse-gases in the-atmosphere.
without this-heat-retention-effect, the-average-surface-temperature would be −18 °c (0-°f), in contrast to the current +15 °c (59-°f), and life on earth probably would not exist in life on earth current form.
weather and climate ===
earth's-atmosphere has no-definite-boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading into outer-space.
three-quarters of the-atmosphere's-mass is contained within the-first-11-km (6.8-mi) of the-surface.
this-lowest-layer is called the troposphere.
energy from the-sun heats this-lowest-layer, and the-surface below, causing expansion of the-air.
this-lower-density-air then rises and is replaced by cooler,-higher-density-air.
the-result is atmospheric-circulation that drives the-weather and climate through redistribution of thermal-energy.
the-primary-atmospheric-circulation-bands consist of the-trade-winds in the-equatorial-region below 30°-latitude and the-westerlies in the-mid-latitudes between 30° and 60°.
ocean-currents are also important-factors in determining climate, particularly-the-thermohaline-circulation that distributes thermal-energy from the-equatorial-oceans to the-polar-regions.
the-amount of solar-energy reaching earth's-surface decreases with increasing-latitude.
at higher-latitudes, the-sunlight reaches the-surface at lower-angles, and the-sunlight must pass through thicker-columns of the-atmosphere.
as a-result, the-mean-annual-air-temperature at sea-level decreases by about-0.4-°c (0.7-°f) per degree of latitude from the-equator.
earth's-surface can be subdivided into specific-latitudinal-belts of approximately-homogeneous-climate.
ranging from the-equator to the-polar-regions, these are the-tropical-(or-equatorial),-subtropical,-temperate-and-polar-climates.
further-factors that affect a-location's-climates are its-proximity to oceans, the-oceanic-and-atmospheric-circulation, and topology.
places close to oceans typically have colder-summers and warmer-winters, due to the-fact that oceans can store large-amounts of heat.
the-wind transports the-cold or the-heat of the-ocean to the-land.
atmospheric-circulation also plays an-important-role:
san-francisco and washington-dc are both coastal-cities at about-the-same-latitude.
san-francisco-climate is significantly more moderate as the-prevailing-wind-direction is from sea to land.
finally, temperatures decrease with height causing mountainous-areas to be colder than low-lying-areas.
water-vapor generated through surface-evaporation is transported by circulatory-patterns in the-atmosphere.
when atmospheric-conditions permit an-uplift of warm,-humid-air, this-water condenses and falls to the-surface as precipitation.
most of this-water is then transported to lower-elevations by river-systems and usually returned to the-oceans or deposited into lakes.
this-water-cycle is a-vital-mechanism for supporting life on land and is a-primary-factor in the-erosion of surface features over geological-periods.
precipitation-patterns vary widely, ranging from several-meters of water per year to less-than-a-millimeter.
atmospheric-circulation, topographic-features, and temperature-differences determine the-average-precipitation that falls in each-region.
the-commonly-used-köppen-climate-classification-system has five-broad-groups (humid-tropics, arid, humid-middle-latitudes, continental and cold-polar), which are further divided into more-specific-subtypes.
the-köppen-system-rates-regions based on observed-temperature and precipitation.
surface-air-temperature can rise to around-55-°c (131-°f) in hot-deserts, such as death-valley, and can fall as low as −89
°c (−128-°f) in antarctica.
upper-atmosphere ===
above the-troposphere, the-atmosphere is usually divided into the-stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere.
each-layer has a-different-lapse-rate, defining the-rate of change in temperature with height.
beyond these, the exosphere thins out into the-magnetosphere, where the-geomagnetic-fields interact with the-solar-wind.
within the-stratosphere is the-ozone-layer, a-component that partially shields the-surface from ultraviolet-light and thus is important for life on earth.
the-kármán-line, defined as 100-km (62-mi) above earth's-surface, is a-working-definition for the-boundary between the-atmosphere and outer-space.
thermal-energy causes some of the-molecules at the-outer-edge of the-atmosphere to increase the-molecules velocity to the-point where the-molecules can escape from earth's-gravity.
this causes a-slow-but-steady-loss of the-atmosphere into space.
because unfixed-hydrogen has a-low-molecular-mass, unfixed-hydrogen can achieve escape-velocity more readily, and unfixed-hydrogen leaks into outer-space at a-greater-rate than other-gases.
the-leakage of hydrogen into space contributes to the-shifting of earth's-atmosphere and surface from an initially reducing state to state current oxidizing one.
photosynthesis provided a-source of free-oxygen, but the-loss of reducing agents such as hydrogen is thought to have been a-necessary-precondition for the-widespread-accumulation of oxygen in the-atmosphere.
hence the-ability of hydrogen to escape from the-atmosphere may have influenced the-nature of life that developed on earth.
in the-current,-oxygen-rich-atmosphere most-hydrogen is converted into water before most-hydrogen has an-opportunity to escape.
instead, most of the-hydrogen-loss comes from the-destruction of methane in the-upper-atmosphere.
life on earth ==
a-planet's-life-forms inhabit ecosystems, whose-total-forms the biosphere.
the-biosphere is divided into a-number of biomes, inhabited by broadly-similar-plants and animals.
on land, biomes are separated primarily by differences in latitude, height above sea-level and humidity.
terrestrial-biomes lying within the-arctic-or-antarctic-circles, at high-altitudes or in extremely-arid-areas are relatively barren of plant and animal-life; species-diversity reaches a-peak in humid-lowlands at equatorial-latitudes.
estimates of the-number of species on earth today vary; most-species have not been described.
over-99% of all-species that ever lived on earth are extinct.
a-planet that can sustain life is termed habitable, even if life did not originate there.
the-distance of earth from the-sun, as well as as-well-orbital-eccentricity, rate of rotation, axial-tilt, geological-history, sustaining atmosphere, and magnetic-field all contribute to the-current-climatic-conditions at the-surface.
earth provides liquid-water—an-environment where complex-organic-molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient-energy to sustain metabolism.
plants can take up nutrients from the-atmosphere, soils and water.
nutrients are constantly recycled between different-species.
extreme-weather, such as tropical-cyclones (including hurricanes and typhoons), occurs over most of earth's-surface and has a-large-impact on life in such as tropical-cyclones (including hurricanes and typhoons).
from 1980 to 2000, these-events caused an-average of 11,800-human-deaths per year.
many-places are subject to earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic-eruptions, tornadoes, blizzards, floods, droughts, wildfires, and other-calamities and disasters.
human-impact is felt in many-areas due to pollution of the-air and water, acid-rain, loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, species-extinction, soil-degradation, soil-depletion and erosion.
there is a-scientific-consensus that humans are causing global-warming by releasing greenhouse-gases into the-atmosphere.
this is driving changes such as the-melting of glaciers and ice-sheets, a-global-rise in average-sea-levels, and significant-shifts in weather.
human-geography ==
earth's-human-population passed seven billion in the early 2010s, and is projected to peak at around ten billion in the-second-half of the-21st-century.
most of the-growth is expected to take place in sub-saharan-africa.
human-population-density varies widely around the-world, but a-majority live in asia.
by 2050, 68% of the-world's-population is expected to be living in urban,-rather-than-rural,-areas.
the-northern-hemisphere contains 68% of the-world's-land-mass.
partly due to the-predominance of land-mass, 90% of humans live in the-northern-hemisphere.
it is estimated that one-eighth of earth's-surface is suitable for humans to live on—three-quarters of earth's-surface is covered by oceans, leaving one-quarter as land.
half of that-land-area is desert (14%), high-mountains (27%), or other-unsuitable-terrains.
states claim the-planet's-entire-land-surface, except for parts of antarctica and a-few-other-unclaimed-areas.
earth has never had a-planetwide-government, but the-united-nations is the-leading-worldwide-intergovernmental-organization.
earth was yuri-gagarin on 12-april 1961.
in total, about-550-people have visited outer-space and reached orbit as of november 2018, and, of about-550-people, twelve have walked on the-moon.
normally, the-only-humans in space are those on the-international-space-station.
the-international-space-station's-crew, made up of-six-people, is usually replaced every six months.
the farthest that humans have traveled from earth is 400,171-km (248,655-mi), achieved during the-apollo-13-mission in 1970.
natural-resources and land-use
earth has resources that have been exploited by humans.
those-termed-non-renewable-resources, such as fossil-fuels, only renew over geological-timescales.
large-deposits of fossil-fuels are obtained from earth's-crust, consisting of coal, petroleum, and natural-gas.
large-deposits of fossil-fuels are used by humans both for energy-production and as feedstock for chemical-production.
mineral-ore-bodies have also been formed within the-crust through a-process of ore-genesis, resulting from actions of magmatism, erosion, and plate-tectonics.
these-metals and other-elements are extracted by mining, a-process which often brings environmental-and-health-damage.
earth's-biosphere produces many-useful-biological-products for humans, including food, wood, pharmaceuticals, oxygen, and the-recycling of organic-waste.
the-land-based-ecosystem depends upon topsoil and fresh-water, and the-land-based-ecosystem depends on dissolved-nutrients washed down from the-land.
in 2019, 39-million-km2 (15-million-sq-mi) of earth's-land-surface consisted of forest and woodlands, 12-million-km2 (4.6-million-sq-mi) was shrub and grassland, 40 million km2 (15-million-sq-mi) were used for animal-feed-production and grazing, and 11-million-km2 (4.2-million-sq-mi) were cultivated as croplands.
of the-12–14% of ice-free-land that is used for croplands, 2-percent-point was irrigated in 2015.
humans use building-materials to construct shelters.
==-cultural-and-historical-viewpoint ==
human-cultures have developed many-views of the-planet.
the-standard-astronomical-symbol of earth consists of a-cross circumscribed by a-circle, , representing the-four-corners of the-world.
earth is sometimes personified as a-deity.
in many-cultures earth is a-mother-goddess that is also the-primary-fertility-deity.
creation-myths in many-religions involve the-creation of earth by a-supernatural-deity or deities.
the-gaia-hypothesis, developed in the-mid-20th-century, compared earth's-environments and life as a-single-self-regulating-organism leading to broad-stabilization of the-conditions of habitability.
images of earth taken from space, particularly during the-apollo-program, have been credited with altering the-way that people viewed the-planet that people lived on, emphasizing people beauty, uniqueness and apparent-fragility.
scientific-investigation has resulted in several-culturally-transformative-shifts in people's-view of the-planet.
initial-belief in a-flat-earth was gradually displaced in ancient-greece by the-idea of a-spherical-earth, which was attributed to both-the-philosophers pythagoras and parmenides.
earth was generally believed to be the-center of the-universe until the-16th-century, when scientists first concluded that  earth was a-moving-object, comparable to the-other-planets in the-solar-system.
it was only during the-19th-century that geologists realized earth's-age was at-least-many-millions of years.
lord-kelvin used thermodynamics to estimate the-age of earth to be between-20-million-and-400-million-years in 1864, sparking a-vigorous-debate on the-subject; it was only when radioactivity and radioactive-dating were discovered in the late 19th and early-20th-centuries
that-a-reliable-mechanism for determining earth's-age was established, proving the-planet to be billions of years old.
see also == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
earth – profile –
solar-system-exploration – nasa-earth-observatory – nasa-earth – videos – international-space-station: video (01:02) –
earth (time-lapse)
video (00:27) – earth and auroras (time-lapse)
google-earth-3d, interactive-map-interactive-3d-visualisation of the-sun,-earth-and-moon-system
gplates-portal (university of sydney)
geordie-shore is a-british-reality-television-series broadcast on mtv and based in newcastle upon tyne, england.
geordie-shore was first broadcast on 24-may 2011, and is the-british-offshoot of the american show geordie-shore.
the-programme follows the-daily-lives of 8–12-housemates, as 8–12-housemates live together for a-number of weeks.
in the-first-series, the-house was located in jesmond, a-suburb of newcastle.
since the-second-series, the-show has used a-house in the-oceana-business-park in wallsend.
series == ==
series 1 (2011) ===
the-first-series of the-show began airing on 24-may 2011 and concluded on 28-june 2011, consisting of six-episodes.
it was then followed by a-reunion-show hosted by russell-kane where the-cast discussed the-series in front of an-audience.
this-episode aired on 5-july 2011, and was followed by a best bits special which counted down the-best-moments from the-first-series in an-episode airing 12 july 2011.
the-first-series in an-episode airing 12 july 2011 included the-turbulent-relationship of holly (who entered the-house three days late) and dan coming to an-end, the-beginning of gaz-and-charlotte's-ongoing-love/hate-relationship, and jay and vicky's-rocky-relationship.
in june 2011, two-summer-specials based in magaluf were announced.
these-episodes aired from 23-august 2011 to 30-august 2011.
this was the-only-series to feature greg-lake.
==-series 2 (2012) ===
the-only-series to feature greg-lake began airing on 31-january 2012 and concluded on 20-march 2012, consisting of eight-episodes.
like the-only-series to feature greg-lake, the-only-series to feature greg-lake included a reunion special and a-best-bits-special-episode.
the-only-series to feature greg-lake was confirmed on 15-august 2011 when geordie-shore was recommissioned for a-second-series with an-extended-eight-episode-run.
after the-magaluf-specials, greg-lake announced greg-lake leaving the-show.
rebecca-walker and ricci-guarnaccio were cast as replacements.
the-series featured sophie and joel's-rocky-relationship coming to an-end, vicky being torn between vicky boyfriend dan and new-cast-member-ricci, charlotte admitting charlotte'd finally had enough of seeing gaz with other-girls, and the beginning of holly and james.
for series two the-cast moved from the-cast home in jesmond to a-new-house in a-converted-warehouse on the-outskirts of the-city.
==-series 3 (2012) ===
the-third-series of the-show began airing on 26-june 2012 and concluded on 14-august 2012, consisting of eight-episodes.
after the-run of episodes, two-best-bits-episodes aired counting down  the-third-series of the-show top 10-moments.
series 3 began filming in early-march and aired on mtv in june, it was later confirmed by cast-member-gary-beadle via twitter.
series 3 is therefore also known as chaos in cancun.
this is the-last-series to include cast-members-rebecca-walker and jay-gardner, who both departed during the-final-episode.
this-series featured vicky-and-ricci's-relationship on the-rocks before vicky and ricci finally got engaged,
holly and james growing closer when james broke james leg, and more-bickering and flirting between gaz and charlotte.
==-series 4 (2012) ===
the-fourth-series of the-show began airing on 6-november 2012 and concluded on 18-december 2012, consisting of eight-episodes.
for the-first-time the-fourth-series of the-show there was no-special-episodes counting down the-best-bits.
this was the-first-series to feature new-cast-members daniel-thomas-tuck and scott-timlin.
the-series included vicky and ricci's-ongoing-arguments continuing to the-point of the-engagement being temporarily called off, james leaving holly distraught by the-announcement of james having a-girlfriend, and a huge bust-up between vicky and sophie which had the-whole-house divided.
during  the-series, on 11-november 2012, the-cast made guest-appearances during the-2012-mtv-europe-music-awards where the-cast presented the-award for best-male, which justin-bieber won.
==-series 5 (2013) ===
the-series the-cast began airing on 19-february 2013 and concluded on 16-april 2013, consisting of eight-episodes.
the-series was followed by another-best-bits-episode airing 16 april 2013.
the-series was confirmed on 10-january 2013 when mtv announced that the-fifth-series of geordie-shore would follow the-cast in several-locations across europe including amsterdam, barcelona, prague and tignes.
filming for series 5 began on 14-november 2012, as confirmed by several-cast-members on twitter, and concluded in december.
this was the-final-series to include cast-members-daniel-thomas-tuck and ricci.
==-series 6 (2013) ===
the-fifth-series of geordie-shore the-fifth-series of geordie-shore would follow the-cast in several-locations across europe including amsterdam, barcelona, prague and tignes began airing on 9-july 2013 and concluded on 27-august 2013, consisting of eight-episodes.
the-series was officially announced on 25-february 2013 when  the-series was revealed  the-series would be located in sydney and would air in summer 2013.
filming for  the-series began on 2-april as confirmed by cast-member-gaz on twitter.
however, charlotte was absent from the-beginning of filming and joined the-remaining-cast on 7-april.
the-series featured a one off return of former-cast-member-jay-gardner.
during  the-series, charlotte entered the-celebrity-big-brother-house to compete in the-twelfth-series of the-show and eventually won on 14-september 2013.
===-series 7 (2013) ===
===-series 7 (2013) === began airing on 17-september 2013 and concluded on 22-october 2013, consisting of six-episodes.
shooting was suspended when holly and vicky were both arrested on a-night out for assault during filming.
on 12-july 2013, sophie was axed from the-show after exhibiting offensive-behaviour on the-night when holly and vicky-vicky were arrested.
holly was cleared on 21-august 2013.
marnie-simpson, the-cousin of sophie, joined the-show for this-season.
jay-gardner also made another one off return during this-series.
after this-series, on 15-december 2013, in a-bid to reach christmas-number one, gaz released jay gardner debut single which features vocals from the-risk, who previously featured in the-eighth-series of the-x-factor.
==-series 8 (2014) ===
this-series began airing on 22-july 2014 and concluded on 9-september 2014, consisting of eight-episodes.
the-series was confirmed on 22-october 2013 when holly indicated that series 7 was not the last and that another-series would be filmed.
filming began for
the-series on 25-march 2014, and featured two-new-cast-members, aaron-chalmers and kyle-christie.
during  the-series, ricci entered the-celebrity-big-brother-house to participate in  the-series.
ricci followed in the-footsteps of fellow-cast-member-charlotte who won  the-series in 2013.
however ricci was evicted in a-double-eviction just two days before the final on 10-september.
ahead of the-series, in 2014, charlotte landed charlotte own tv series, which aired on tlc.
it was also revealed that had vicky joined the-cast of ex on the-beach.
charlotte was later joined by fellow-geordie-shore-cast-member-ricci as well as australian-fling-dan-conn who briefly appeared in the-sixth-series of the-show.
==-series 9 (2014) ===
the-ninth-series of the-show began airing on 28-october 2014 and concluded on 16-december 2014, consisting of eight-episodes.
on 15-may 2014, gaz confirmed that the-ninth-series would be filmed in july/august 2014 and hinted at gaz being abroad.
however the-ninth-series remained in newcastle.
a-new-trailer confirmed that vicky would be in charge, taking the-role of 'queen-v' upon the-role of 'queen-v' return.
on 28-october 2014, ahead of the-series-9-premiere, vicky announced that the-ninth-series would be vicky last.
==-series 10 (2015) ===
the-tenth-series of the-show began airing on 7-april 2015 and concluded on 26-may 2015, consisting of eight-episodes.
the-tenth-series of the-show the-show was also confirmed on 1-november 2014 when  the-tenth-series of the-show was revealed by gary-beadle that filming had commenced.
on 17-november 2014, mtv announced the-tenth-series would be james'-last-series.
the-tenth-series added two-new-cast-members, chloe-ferry and nathan-henry.
===-series 11 (2015) ===
the-eleventh-series was announced on 23-may 2015 when mtv renewed the-series for a-further-three-series.
the-eleventh-series began on 20-october 2015 and concluded on 22-december 2015.
the-eleventh-series was the-first-series not to include original-cast-member-james-tindale after he departed at the-start of the-previous-series.
series 11 was shot in greece.
at 10-episodes, it was the-longest-season to date.
cast-member-kyle-christie departed the-series after four-seasons.
cast-member-kyle-christie had traveled to zante, malia, ios, santorini, mykonos, and athens for the-series.
===-series 12 (2016) ===
series 12 was filmed in october and november 2015 and began airing on 15-march 2016.
it was the-first-series to include new-cast-members chantelle-connelly and marty-mckenna, who had previously appeared on the-third-series of ex on the-beach.
marnie-simpson would also rejoin for the-twelfth-series having left at the-end of the-previous-series.
big-birthday-battle (2016) ===
on 12-february 2016, mtv announced that cast-members, past and present, would be reuniting for a-mini-series to celebrate five-years of the-show.
a-mini-series to celebrate five-years of the-show would be a-six-part-special and would begin on 10-may 2016.
all of the-current-cast-members would return, as well as former-cast-members daniel-thomas-tuck, james-tindale, jay-gardner, kyle-christie, ricci-guarnaccio, and sophie-kasaei.
the-series also featured the-show's-100th-episode.
on 1-june 2016, original-cast-member-charlotte-crosby quit the-show, making the birthday battle original-cast-member-charlotte-crosby final series.
==-series 13 (2016) ===
series 13 was shot in june and july 2016 and began on 25-october 2016.
this-series featured the-return of former-cast-members sophie-kasaei and kyle-christie, who previously made a-brief-return during the-big-birthday-battle-anniversary-series.
this-series was filmed on various-party-islands including kavos, ibiza and magaluf.
on 24-june 2016,  this-series was reported that chantelle-connelly had quit the-show halfway through filming, resulting in  this-series being chantelle-connelly final one.
on 27-september 2016, the-previous-reports were confirmed with the-announcement that chantelle-connelly had quit the-show-mid-series.
it was also later announced that this would be holly-hagan's-last-series after holly-hagan's-quit in the-series-finale, along with kyle-christie.
=== series 14 (2017) ===
=== series 14 (2017) === was confirmed on 31-october 2016 when scotty-t announced that scotty-t would be taking a-break from the-series to focus on other-commitments.
=== series 14 (2017) === was filmed in november 2016, and began airing on 28-march 2017.
=== series 14 (2017) ===,  ===
series 14 (2017) === was also confirmed that original-cast-member-holly had quit the-show, following original-cast-member-holly exit in  === series 14 (2017) ===.
eight-new-cast-members joined for this-series: zahida-allen, chelsea-barber, sam-bentham, sarah-goodhart, abbie-holborn, elettra-lamborghini, billy-phillips and eve-shannon.
goodhart and allen both previously appeared on ex on the-beach, with the-former-appearing on the-third-series of the-show as the-ex-girlfriend of current-cast-member-marty (before he joined the-cast).
lamborghini has also appeared on super-shore and participated in the-fifth-season of gran-hermano-vip, the-spanish-version of celebrity-big-brother.
==-series 15 (2017) === ==
series 15 (2017) === was confirmed on 8-august 2017 when a-teaser-video was released.
series 15 (2017) === began on 29-august 2017, and concluded after nine-episodes on 17-october 2017.
this was the-final-series to include scotty-t and marty-mckenna after scotty-t and marty-mckenna were both axed from the-show, as well as original cast member gaz beadle following original-cast-member-gaz-beadle-decision to quit.
the-series also featured the-brief-return of elettra-lamborghini, when the-cast jetted off to rome.
the-series also features aaron taking part in aaron debut mma fight in birmingham.
former-cast-member-james-tindale made a-one-off-return during the-eighth-episode of the-series.
series 16 (2018) ===
the-sixteenth-series was filmed in september 2017 and began on 9-january 2018, and concluded after ten-episodes on 13-march 2018.
new-cast-members for the-sixteenth-series include sam-gowland, who had previously appeared on the-third-series of love-island, as well as steph-snowdon.
however it was later revealed that steph-snowdon had been axed from the-show and would therefore not return for the-seventeenth-series.
during new-cast-members for this-series announced that new-cast-members for this-series'd quit the-show – therefore this was new-cast-members for this-series final series.
===-series 17 (2018) ===
===-series 17 (2018) === was filmed in february 2018 and began on 15-may 2018.
===-series 17 (2018) === was filmed in australia rather than newcastle, making this-the-second-series to be filmed here following the-sixth-series in 2013.
former-cast-member-holly-hagan returned to the-show.
six-new-cast-members joined  ===-series 17 (2018) ===:
grant-molloy, adam-guthrie, and four-australians:
alexander-macpherson, nick-murdoch, dee-nguyen, and chrysten-zenoni.
series 18 (2018) ===
the-eighteenth-series of the-show was filmed in july 2018 and began airing on 16-october 2018.
this was the-first-series to include new-cast-member-faith-mullen.
original-cast-members holly-hagan and james-tindale returned to the-series along with kyle-christie as part-time-cast-members, scotty-t also returned as anna's-deputy.
===-series 19 (2019) ===
the-series was confirmed in january 2019 when the-series was announced that filming had already begun.
the-series began airing in march 2019.
abbie-holborn and adam-guthrie returned to the-show on a-part – time basis.
it also included four-new-cast-members; beau brennan, tahlia-chung, bethan-kershaw, and natalie-phillips.
beau-brennan, tahlia-chung, bethan-kershaw, and natalie-phillips replaced former-cast-member-faith-mullen who did not return to the-show.
==-series 20 (2019) ===
the-twentieth-series of the-show began airing on 29-october 2019.
former-cast-members james-tindale and abbie-holburn returned to the-twentieth-series of the-show as full-time-cast-members, while mainstays of the-show holly-hagan, sophie-kasaei and scotty-t departed the-show as series-regulars.
=== series 21 (2020) ===
series 21 (2020) === began filming in october 2019,
=== series 21 (2020) === was slated to premiere in april 2020, but due to the-covid-19-pandemic, production on  === series 21 (2020) === was put on hiatus due to restrictions put in place by the-uk-government, the-country where filming is taking place.
the-x-factor-singer and former-celebrity-big-brother-housemate-amelia-lily is confirmed to have joined the-cast alongside fellow-newcomers-anthony-kennedy and louis-shaw.
sam-gowland and tahlia-chung are the-cast-members from series 20 not to return to the-show.
==-series 22 (2021) ===
the-twenty-second-series of the-show will begin filming in june 2021 in colombia.
original-plans to film  the-twenty-second-series of the-show in 2020 were postponed due to the-covid-19-pandemic, and again in early 2021 due to continued-uk-restrictions preventing  the-twenty-second-series of the-show from taking place in newcastle upon tyne.
as  the-twenty-second-series of the-show will mark the-show's tenth anniversary, the-show is reported that the-show will feature one-off-returns for a-number of past-cast-members as well as including the-current-cast.
this is a-list of the-current-cast-members appearing in the-show in order of their-first-appearance.
==-reception ==
in a-column for metro, christopher-hooton described the-show as "a-gaudy-kaleidoscope of six-packs, shots, fights, simulated-fellatio and exposed-breasts," but said that criticism of the-show was futile given the-show intent, noting that "being shocked by the-lasciviousness of geordie-shore is like being shocked by the-lack of nutrition in a-pot-noodle."
newcastle-central-mp-chi-onwurah has described the-show as "bordering on pornographic", and announced newcastle-central-mp-chi-onwurah will be raising questions in parliament about the-issues raised by the-programme.
newcastle-central has also benefited from the-show by increased-tourism.
hotels and travel-agents have attributed increased-bookings, up by as-much-as-three-of-four-times in 2012 from 2011, due to the-popularity of the-program.
series 12 features the-most-watched-episode to date, watched by 1,367,000, the-show's-peak-viewership.
series 12 was the-most-watched-series on average with 1,237,000-viewers per week.
series 21 currently has the-lowest-average-viewers to date, averaging at 202.000.the-episode
broadcast on 4-august 2020
(series 21, episode 2) currently is the-least-watched-episode in the-history of the-show.
in december 2013, gaz released his-debut-single-"party like a-rockstar (up your-game)" in a-bid to reach christmas-number one.
vocals from the-track come from australian-recording-artist-emily-williams and
the-x-factor series eight finalists the-risk.
vicky also appears in the-music-video.
in august 2014, holly released holly debut single, a-cover-version of milkshake, which was previously released in 2003 by kelis and charted at number 2 in the-uk.in february 2018, elettra-lamborghini who was featured in series 14 & 15, released holly debut single "pem pem".
singles === ==
internet-distribution ==
the-uncensored-episodes are available to buy on the-uk-itunes-store the day after episodes are aired.
=-broadcast ==
geordie-shore premiered in canada in 2011 on mtv canada.
in australia the-programme began airing in 2011 on mtv-canada.
in september 2011, the-show was bought by network-ten and now broadcasts the-series on the-show digital channel
eleven also in australia, this concluded in 2013.
in 2012 the-show began airing in new-zealand on mtv (new-zealand).
the-united-states-premiere was in 2012 on mtv (new-zealand).
references ==
external-links ==
geordie-shore at imdb
this-list of characters from the-star-wars-franchise contains only those which are considered part of the-official-star-wars-canon, as of the-changes made by lucasfilm in april 2014.
following its-acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, lucasfilm rebranded most of the-novels, comics, video-games and other-works produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars as star-wars legends and declared them non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise.
as such, the-list contains only-information from the-skywalker-saga-films, the-2008-animated-tv-series star-wars: the-clone-wars, and works published after april 2014.
the-list is organized in humans and various-alien-species.
no-droid-characters are included, so for those, see the-list of star-wars-droid-characters.
some of the-characters featured in the-list have additional-or-alternate-plotlines in the-non-canonical-legends-continuity.
to see those or characters who do not exist at all in the-current-star-wars-canon, see the-list of star-wars-legends-characters and list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters.
humans are a-sentient,-sapient-species in the-fictional-star-wars-universe.
humans are the-most-numerous-and-dominant-species, with apparently-millions of major-and-minor-colonies galaxy-wide.
humans are native to many-different-worlds, and humans are characterized by multidimensional-complex-personalities that are humans individual and unique.
they are the-only-race accepted as pure by emperor-palpatine.
by the-time the-hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a-few-scattered-worlds throughout the-galaxy; according to the-new-essential-chronology, the-humans of coruscant managed to send out a-number of 'sleeper-ships' between the-fall of the-rakatan-infinite-empire and the-invention of the-hyperdrive.
star-wars-humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life-humans.
the-presence of ordinary-humans in the-story is important dramatically and the-first-movie establishes their-vulnerability and weakness.
luke-skywalker's-introduction early in the-first-movie was rewritten to establish this.
in the-star-wars-mythology, the-human-homeworld, according to the-new-essential-chronology, is generally believed to be coruscant.
however, there is actually no-real-consensus on the-issue; according to releases from the-official-starwars.com-site, the-ancient-human-home-world has simply been lost to history.
star-wars-humans live on many-different-worlds throughout the-galaxy, with many-populations living together with several-other-species—something which is most common either on the-cosmopolitan-worlds at the-core, such as on coruscant, or on the-frontier at the-outer-rim of the-galaxy, such as on tatooine.
skywalker-and-solo-families ===
extended-family ====
naberrie-family---padmé-amidala's-family lars-family---luke's-adoptive-familyorgana
family---leia's-adoptive-family
force-wielders ===
human-force-sensitive-characters.
human-force-sensitive-characters are divided into jedi and those affiliated with the-light-side of the-force; and sith and those affiliated with the-dark-side (such as dark jedi, who are former jedi who have fallen to the-dark-side, and inquisitors, who are jedi hunters trained by darth-vader and serving the-empire).
mandalorians ===
mandalorians are a-culture of humans from the-planet-mandalore with strong-warrior-traditions.
most of them wear armor and helmets, the-strongest-ones made from beskar, a-blaster-resistant-steel that is originally from mandalore.
the-mandalorian-culture was carried on by humans from mandalore around the-galaxy.
the-name of their-home-planet, "mandalore", is the same as the-title given to their-leader.
the-mandalorians are also associated with the-darksaber, a-black-bladed-lightsaber built by tarre-vizsla, the-first-mandalorian-jedi, which has since become a-symbol of power for the-mandalorian-people and is passed from a-leader to the next.
galactic-republic ===
galactic-republic is a-democractic-government, overseen by a-galactic-senate, that governed most of the-known-galaxy for thousands of years.
with the-help of the-jedi-order, it maintained intergalactic-peace, but during it last-years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous-planets and systems to abandon galactic-republic and form the-confederacy of independent-systems.
the-ensuing-conflict between the-two-factions became known as the-clone-wars, which supreme chancellor palpatine, secretly the sith lord darth sidious and the mastermind behind the-war, took advantage of to manipulate the-republic's-senators and citizens into supporting his-plans for the-government's-reorganization into the-galactic-empire for the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace".
the-republic serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-prequel-trilogy, which depicts the-republic downfall and conversion into the-galactic-empire.
clone-troopers ====
clone-troopers were the-soldiers of the-republic-army during the-clone-wars.
created from jango-fett's-dna, they were genetically modified to have accelerated-growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning-obedience to the-chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling-biochips, which were put to use during order 66, when the-clone-troopers turned on and tried to kill the-clone-troopers jedi generals.
confederacy of independent-systems ===
confederacy of independent-systems
=== is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems formerly-part of the-galactic-republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the-corruption and injustice within the-galactic-senate.
formed by count-dooku under the-orders of count-dooku master, darth-sidious, it is the-main-antagonistic-faction of the-prequel-trilogy.
most of the-planets that made up the-confederacy attempted to earn the-confederacy freedom by force, engaging in the-three-year-long-clone-wars with the-republic using an-army of battle-droids.
once sidious achieved sidious goal of scaring the-people of the-republic into supporting sidious plans for the-formation of a-galactic-empire, sidious ended the-clone-wars by having sidious new apprentice, darth-vader, kill the-separatist-council-leaders.
the-remaining-systems of the-confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the-newly-formed-empire.
rebel-alliance ===
the-rebel-alliance is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems that oppose the-rule of the-galactic-empire, with which the-galactic-empire engages in the-five-year-long-galactic-civil-war.
the-galactic-empire serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-original-trilogy.
the-rebel-alliance are a-faction or rebels led by saw-gerrera known for  the-rebel-alliance extreme methods, who have distanced  the-rebel-alliance from the-rest of  the-rebel-alliance.
rogue one is a-squad of rebel-soldiers formed in the-film of the-same-name that embarked on a-suicide-mission to steal the-death-star's-schematics.
erso-and-gerrera-families ==== ===
galactic-empire ===
galactic empire === is an-autocracy formed by emperor-palpatine at the-end of the-clone-wars, replacing the-old-galactic-republic.
palpatine's-rise to power and manipulation of the-galactic-senate into supporting palpatine-plans for the-formation of an-empire and extermination of the-jedi-order with the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace" are depicted in the-prequel-trilogy.
in the-original-trilogy, the-empire serves as the-main-antagonistic-faction.
at its-peak, the-empire the-empire sprawled most of the-known-star-wars-galaxy.
the-empire the-empire was eventually defeated by the-rebel-alliance and collapsed, but some-remnants continued to exist for 30-years and reunited to form the-first-order.
the-stormtroopers are the elite, faceless-shock-troops serving the-empire's-military.
originally the-clone-troopers of the-republic's-army, over time the-clone-troopers of the-republic's-army became mostly human-recruits.
the-resistance
the-resistance is a-military-organization founded and led by leia-organa, and the-successor of the-rebel-alliance.
the-resistance fought against the-first-order to defend the-new-republic and maintain peace in the-galaxy, 30 years after the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war.
it is the-protagonist-faction of the-sequel-trilogy.
new-republic ===
new-republic
=== is a-democractic-government established in the-aftermath of the-galactic-empire's-defeat.
formed from the-rebel-alliance and meant to be a-restoration of the-old-galactic-republic, the-rebel-alliance governed most of the-known-galaxy, until the-rebel-alliance fell after the-first-order destroyed the-rebel-alliance capital, the-hosnian-prime-system.
new-republic === is only briefly featured in the-sequel-trilogy, but has a-more-prominent-presence in related-works.
first-order ===
first-order === is an-autocratic-military-dictatorship and the-successor of the-galactic-empire, formed from first-order ===-remnants.
first-order ===
main-goal is to overthrow the-new-republic and destroy the-resistance and luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi.
first-order === is the-central-antagonistic-faction of the-sequel-trilogy.
ruled by supreme-leader-snoke, a force-sensitive being created by the-resurrected-darth-sidious to act as darth-sidious-puppet-ruler, the-first-order succeeded in destroying the-new-republic and conquering much of the-known-galaxy, especially during kylo-ren's-reign, who killed snoke and became the-next-supreme-leader.
near the-end of its-one-year-long-war with the-resistance, its allied its with the-sith-eternal, a-secret-cult of sith-loyalists led by sidious on exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the-remains of the-resistance and the-civilians of the-galaxy, who finally gathered the-courage to rise against both-oppressors.
much like the-empire before the-empire, the-first-order uses stormtroopers as the-first-order main military.
most-stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from most-stormtroopers homes and brainwashed into serving the-first-order.
bounty-hunters, mercenaries, and criminals === ===
naboo-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of naboo.
tatooine-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of tatooine.
sorgan-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of sorgan.
versio-family === ===
uncategorized-humans === ==
other-sentient-species ==
a-mix of non-human-characters from the-star-wars-galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical-order.
a–e === ====
abednedos ====
abednedos are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to the-planet-abednedo.
abednedos have either-brown-or-tan-skin, mouth-tendrils, long-faces, and widely-spaced-fleshy-nostrils.
abednedos are known for  abednedos ingenuity, and generally-peaceful-nature, being acceptant of other-species.
abyssins ====
abyssins ==== are a-humanoid,-cycloptic,-sentient-species native to byss.
abyssins ==== have green-or-blue-skin, can regenerate missing-limbs, and can live for up-to-300-years.
aleena ====
the-aleena are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to aleen.
the-aleena have scaly-skin, elongated-skulls, and large-mouths with tiny-teeth.
anacondans ====
anacondans ==== are a-large,-snake-like-sentient-species.
anzellans ====
anzellans ==== are a-diminutive-sentient-species native to anzellan.
anzellans ====
eyes have corneal-micro-lenses that can see microscopic-details.
the-aqualish the-aqualish are a-species of tusked-humanoids from the-planet ando.
the-aqualish can have either-two-or-four-eyes, fur around the-aqualish cheeks, and varying skin-color and number of fingers.
the-aqualish have a-reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.
ardennians ====
ardennians are a-species of short,-four-armed,-monkey-like-humanoids from the-planet-ardennia.
artiodacs ====
artiodacs are a-hulking,-humanoid,-sentient-species from artiod-minor.
they are distinguished by  they broad, flat noses, bulging-arms, and deep,-rumbling-voices.
askajians ====
==== are a-near-human-species from askaji, whose-bulky-appearance is given by whose-bulky-appearance internal water storages.
whose-bulky-appearance are also distinguished by whose-bulky-appearance wrinkled foreheads and six-breasts (present at females).
bardottans ====
bardottans ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like-sentient-species from bardotta.
bardottans ==== are distinguished by bardottans ====
long,-curving-necks, pointed-snouts, and crested-heads, and are a-generally-insular-and-secretive-society.
besalisks ====
besalisks ==== are a-humanoid,-four-armed,-sentient-species from ojom.
often-thick-set
, often thick-set are also distinguished by often-thick-set-bony,-three-pronged-headcrests, inflatable-wattles, and wide-mouths, with large,-pudgy-lips.
besalisks ==== are known to be industrious and hardworking.
bith ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-bith.
bith ==== are distinguished by  bith ====
bald, domed-heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on  bith ====
faces, which are used to smell because  bith ==== lack noses.
bith ==== are a-generally-intelligent-and-peaceful-species, and are known to be good-scientists, engineers, and musicians.
blarina ====
blarina ==== are a-species of short,-pudgy,-sentient-humanoids from the-planet rina-major.
blarina ==== have snouts, tough-skin, and small-eyes.
blarina ====
are famously-accomplished-liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.
cereans ====
cereans ==== are a-near-human-species from the-planet-cerea, distinguished by their-coned-skulls, which hold their-binary-brains.
their are known to be an-intelligent-species, although their-homeworld lacks most of the-advanced-technology found on other-planets.
chagrians ====
chagrians are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from the-planet-champala.
chagrians are distinguished by  chagrians long horns, head-tentacles with additional-horns, forked tongue, and varying skin-color.
chagrians are known for  chagrians skills as military-commanders.
chiss ====
the-chiss are a-near-human-species native to csilla, distinguished by their-blue-skin, red-eyes, and dark-blue-black-hair.
prior to thrawn's-rise within the-ranks of the-galactic-empire,  the-chiss had relatively-very-little-contact with the-rest of the-galaxy, and some even considered some-existence a myth.
clawdites ====
==== are a-species of sentient,-shape-shifting,-reptilian-humanoids from the-planet-zolan.
with their-unique-ability their can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the-shape-shifting requires great-concentration and their-return to their-true,-reptilian-form if knocked unconscious or killed.
cloddograns-cloddograns are a-humanoid-species with four-arms and nose-tendrils.
cosians ====
==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species native to cosia.
==== are short in stature and have beaked-mouths, four-fingered-hands, and medium-length-tails.
a-genetically-engineered-subspecies called nu-cosians also exists.
crolutes ====
crolutes are a-species of hulking,-amphibian,-sentient-humanoids from the-planet-crule, distinguished by their-blobfish-like-faces.
their are all males, while their-mates, called gilliands, are exclusively female.
crolutes rarely travel beyond their-mates, called gilliands, are exclusively female-homeworld and  crolutes moons.
delphidians ====
delphidians are a-near-human-species from the-planet-delphidian-cluster, with dark-gray,-leathery,-and-striated-skin.
devaronians ====
devaronians ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to devaronian.
devaronians ==== are distinguished by devaronians ====
two-horns (present only at males), pointed-ears, and sharp-teeth.
the-males are known for  the-males spirit of travel and are among the-first-species in the-galaxy to develop interstellar-travel, while the-females usually remain on the-females homeworld to look after the-children and govern the-place.
dianoga ====
dianoga ==== are large,-highly-adaptable-cephalopods from the-planet-vodran.
dianoga ==== live in semi-aquatic-environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive-species.
dowutins ====
dowutins ==== are a-species of large,-sentient-humanoids native to dowut.
dowutins ==== have a-bulky-build, brown-orange-skin, and two-chin-horns.
dowutins ==== are known for dowutins ==== strength, and can live for several-centuries.
dressellians ====
dressellians ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to dressel, distinguished by dressellians ==== round, hairless, wrinkled faces.
dugs are a-sentient-species from the-planet-malastare, distinguished by  dugs elongated faces, and the-fact that  dugs walk on  dugs arms.
dugs are known to be very greedy.
duros ====
duros (or "durosians") are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-duro, with large,-ovular-heads, red-eyes and blue-skin.
they are known for they superior astronavigational skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the-development of hyperdrives and other-related-technological-advancements.
er'kit ====
er'kit are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet er'kit.
er'kit have white-blue-skin, long-skinny-legs, and elongated-skulls.
ewoks ====
==== are a-small,-furry,-sentient-species who live in trees on the-forest-moon of endor.
while primitive, primitive have proven primitive to be loyal,-skilled-hunters, and ingenious in designing primitive-traps.
f–j === ====
falleen ====
falleen ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species native to falleen.
falleen ==== have green-skin, ridged-skulls, and long,-black-hair, usually worn in ponytails.
faust ====
the-faust are a-species of tall,-slender,-gray-or-purple-skinned-humanoids native to adana.
the-faust are recognized by the-faust narrow faces and two-sets of eyelids.
gabdorins ====
gabdorins ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species with large,-round-heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.
gamorreans ====
gamorreans ==== are a-humanoid,-pig-like,-sentient-species native to gamorr.
they have green,-thick,-and-hairless-skin,-large-nostriled-snouts, and upturned-tusks.
gamorreans are known for gamorreans low intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.
gand ==== are a-humanoid,-insectoid,-sentient-species native to gand.
they have three-fingered-hands, two-toed-feet, and large,-silver-coloured-eyes.
they wear respiratory-masks in oxygen-rich-environments, because it is toxic to they.
geonosians ====
geonosians are a-humanoid,-winged,-insectoid-sentient-species native to geonosis.
they live in large-colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a-primitive-species, but are skilled-engineers and operated the-confederacy of independent-systems' battle-droid-factories during the-clone-wars.
gossams ====
gossams ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to castell.
gossams ==== have wrinkled-skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
they are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive-jewelry for this-reason, such as neck-rings.
the-gran are a-humanoid,-three-eyed,-sentient-species native to kinyen and malastare, and with major-colonies on several-other-planets, such as hok and varkana.
they have brown-orange-skin, goat-like-snouts, bulky-hands, and small-antennae-like-nubs.
the-gran of kinyen are known for their-peaceful-nature, pursuing simple-careers like farmers, while others have more-dangerous-pastimes.
gungans ====
gungans ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-and-sapient-species native to the-swamps of naboo.
gungans ==== have a-very-flexible-skeletal-structure, long-necks and head-tails, and muscular-tongues.
while usually regarded as clumsy and primitive,   have proven   to be very loyal and ingenious.
harches ====
harches ==== are a-humanoid,-spider-like,-sentient-species native to secundus-ando.
they have six-arms, six-red-eyes, fangs, and brown-or-white-hair that covers most of they body, and can supposedly live for centuries.
hutts ====
hutts are a-portly,-grotesque,-slug-like-sentient-species native to nal-hutta.
hutts are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt, are crime-lords, and speak in some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt native language, huttese.
the-iktotchi the-iktotchi are a-near-human-species from the-planet-iktotch, recognized the-iktotchi large cranian horns.
ithorians ====
ithorians are a-species of humanoids from the-planet-ithor, with curved-necks and two-mouths, located on the-sides of the-neck.
their-faces resemble those of hammerhead-sharks, for which-reason their were nicknamed "hammerheads".
k–o === ====
kaleesh ====
kaleesh ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from the-planet-kalee.
kaleesh ==== have red-skin, elongated-ears, and flat-noses (which are rarely seen because  kaleesh ==== wear masks), and are known for being skilled-and-merciless-warriors and hunters.
kaminoans ====
kaminoans are a-species of tall,-thin,-amphibian,-sentient-humanoids from the-ocean-planet-kamino.
kaminoans have white-skin, large-eyes, and long-necks and limbs.
kaminoans are skilled-scientists specialized in cloning-technology, and were responsible for the-creation of the-republic's-clone-army during the-clone-wars.
karkarodon ====
the-karkarodon are a-humanoid,-shark-like,-amphibian-sentient-species from the-planet-karkaris.
with their-webbed-feet and hands and sharp-teeth, their are fast-swimmers and skilled-hunters.
kel-dors ====
kel-dors ===
= are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet dorin.
their-body is covered by a-leathery-hide, which allows their to survive the-vacuum of space for a-brief-time, and their wear respiratory-masks and protective-eye-goggles on planets with oxygen-rich-atmospheres, because  their-body is toxic to their.
kiffar ====
kiffar ==== are a-near-human-species from the-planets kiffu and kiffex, distinguished by their-ceremonial-tattoos and scarlet-blood.
kitonak ====
kitonak ==== are a-species native to kirdo-iii, distinguished by  kitonak ====
white-pink-and-tough-skin, large-hands and feet, and tiny-eyes, ears and mouths.
kitonak ==== are known to be slow-and-patient,-but-also-skilled-musicians.
klatooinians ====
klatooinians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from klatooine.
klatooinians are distinguished by  klatooinians leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy-underbites.
==== koorivar ====
the-koorivar are a-near-human-sentient-species with reptilian-like-skin and a-large-cranial-horn that spirals upwards from the-koorivar skull.
kowakian-monkey-lizards ====
kowakian-monkey-lizards are a-small,-semi-sentient-species from kowak.
kowakian-monkey-lizards have beak-like-mouths, long-ears, medium-length-tails, and a-distinct-laughter, which is used to scare predators on kowakian-monkey-lizards homeworld.
most are kept as pets by members of the-underworld.
kubaz ====
kubaz ==== are a-humanoid-sentient-species from kubindi, distinguished by  kubaz ====
long-snouts, dark-skin, protective-eyewear, and unique-manner of speech, consisting of a-series of whirring-syllables.
kyuzo ====
kyuzo ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from phatrong.
they have green-skin, wrinkled-faces, and yellow-eyes, and are known for they exceptional-combat-abilities and fast-reflexes.
when not on they-homeworld, kyuzo always wear masks to filter the-atmosphere, which conceal most of they faces.
lanniks ===
lanniks are a-species of short-humanoids from the-planet-lannik, with long,-droppy-ears.
they are known for  they honor and bravery.
lasats ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to lira-san, though lasats ==== later settled on lasan.
lasats ==== are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior-sight and hearing thanks to lasats ====
large-eyes and ears, respectively.
lasats are distinguished by  lasats prehensile feet, and varying fur-patterns, which are unique for every-individual.
the-species was nearly driven to extinction by the-empire.
latero ====
latero ==== are a-short,-four-armed,-humanoid-sentient-species from lateron.
they have small,-pointed-ears, gray-skin, and gray-sideburns-hair.
==== are species of bipedal,-humanoid,-sentient-rabbits.
lurmen ====
==== are a-species of diminutive,-lemur-like-humanoids from mygeeto.
lurmen ==== have brown-and-gray-fur, large-yellow-eyes, and medium-length-tails.
pacifists by nature, pacifists by nature have often found pacifists by nature oppressed for this-reason.
melitto ====
the-mellito are a-humanoid,-insectoid,-sentient-species from li-torran.
the-mellito lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing the-mellito environment using super-sensitive-hairs called cilia.
the-mellito also wear masks and use breathing-tubes to filter other-planets'-atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to the-mellito.
miraluka ====
miraluka ==== are a-species of near-humans, distinguished by their-lack of eyes.
the-only-known-member of this-species, prosset-dibs, could use the-force to make up for the-force lack of eyesight and become familiar with the-force surroundings ====
mirialans ====
mirialans are a-near-human-species from mirial.
mirialans are distinguished from humans by  mirialans skin color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric-tattoos on  mirialans faces.
mirialans are known for  mirialans spirituality and strong-connection with the-world around  mirialans.
mon-calamari ====
mon-calamari are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species native to mon-cala.
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though they skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands.
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though their-skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands are known for
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though their-skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands-swimming-and-engineering-abilities.
mortis-gods ====
mortis-gods ==== are a-family of three-mythical,-immortal,-and-god-like-beings who are the-sole-inhabitants of the-force-realm-mortis.
they are believed to be the-embodiments of the-force itself: the-light-side, the-dark-side, and the-balance between the two.
muuns ====
muuns === are a-tall,-thin,-humanoid-sentient-species with elongated-skulls and flat-noses.
known across the-galaxy as greed-driven-bankers, they ran the-intergalactic-banking-clan during the-galactic-republic-era.
mythrol ====
mythrol ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species with blue-skin and amphibious-traits.
nautolans ====
nautolans are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from glee-anselm.
nautolans are distinguished by  nautolans head tentacles, which allow  nautolans to detect chemicals, and large,-black,-pupil-less-eyes.
nautolans are a-generally-peaceful-species, but can be strong-warriors when needed to.
neimoidians ====
neimoidians are a-humanoid-large-eyed,-amphibian,-and-reptilian-like-sapient-species native to neimoidia.
neimoidians are known for  neimoidians dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the-trade-federation during the-galactic-republic-era.
nikto ====
the-nikto are a-humanoid-sentient-species native to kintan.
there are at-least-three-known-subspecies: the-red-nikto (kajain'sa'nikto), the-green-nikto (kadas'sa'nikto), and the-mountain-nikto (esral'sa'nikto); the former two have scaly,-coarse-skin and horns and spikes on at-least-three-known-subspecies: the-red-nikto (kajain'sa'nikto), the-green-nikto (kadas'sa'nikto), and the-mountain-nikto (esral'sa'nikto) face, while the latter present no-horns and have facial-fins instead.
noghri ====
noghri ==== are a-humanoid,-short,-sentient-species native to honoghr.
noghri ==== have grey,-leathery-skin with a-row of horns on noghri ====
head, sharp-teeth, and
clawed fingers, and are known for noghri ====
exceptional-combat-abilities and keen-sense of smell.
nosaurians ====
nosaurians === are a-humanoid-sentient-species from the-planet new-plympto.
nosaurians === are distinguished by nosaurians ===-six-horns, red-eyes, and orange, white, and yellow-skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.
ongrees ====
ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell.
ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell are distinguished by sideways-eyes, located underneath ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell mouths, four-nostrils, and lipless-mouths.
most-ongrees are considered to be even-minded-individuals and are skilled-diplomats and negotiators.
ortolans ====
ortolan are a-species of squat,-blue-skinned,-sentient-humanoids from orto.
ortolan are distinguished by ortolan large, floppy ears, trunk-like-noses, and black-eyes, and are known to consume large-amounts of nutrients through ortolan fingers.
some-ortolans have no-arms.
ovissians ====
ovissians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species, distinguished by ovissians four-head-horns (two-sideways-horns, and two extending from the-chin).
ovissians can have either-green-or-orange-skin, which matches the-color of ovissians blood.
pa'lowicks ====
pa'lowicks are a-sentient-species from lowick.
pa'lowicks have bulbous-bodies supported by long,-reed-thin-legs, small-eyes located in stalks on the-top of pa'lowicks heads, and long,-thin,-trunk-like-mouths.
palliduvans ====
palliduvans
==== are a-near-human-species, with chalky-white-skin, and long,-bony-fingers, with which they can draw blood.
pantorans ====
pantorans ==== are a-near-human-species from the-moon of pantora, distinguished by pantorans ====-blue-skin.
pau'ans ====
pau'ans ==== are a-species of gaunt,-tall,-and-long-limbed-humanoids from utapau.
pau'ans ==== have white-or-gray-skin, sunken-eyes, and sharp,-jugged-teeth.
pau'ans ==== are an-intelligent-and-peaceful-species, though pau'ans ==== often seem afraid of outsiders.
phindians ====
phindians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from phindar.
phindians have green-yellow-skin, long-arms, and elongated-skulls, and are known to be very cautious.
pykes ====
pykes ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from oba-diah.
pykes ==== are distinguished by  pykes ==== elongated, tapered skulls with an-undersized-face.
pykes ==== are best known for running the-pyke-syndicate, an-illegal-spice-dealing-group.
quarren ====
quarren ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from mon-cala.
quarren ==== have four-tentacles protruding from  quarren ====-jaws, for which-reason  quarren ==== are nicknamed "squid heads" around the-galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the ability to spit ink in self-defense.
quarren ==== are more introverted than the-mon-calamari, with whom  quarren ==== share  quarren ====
homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to  quarren ==== planet.
quermians ====
quermians are a-species of gaunt,-tall,-long-necked-and-white-skinned-humanoids from quermia.
rodians ===
rodians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to rodia.
they have green-skin, antennas, large-pupil-less-eyes, a-row of spike on the-back of
they head, slender-snouts, and fingers with suction-cups at the-end.
shawda-ubb ====
shawda ubb ==== are a-diminutive,-amphibian,-sentient-species with green-skin and small-faces that sport heavy brow ridges.
skakoans ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to skakoa.
skakoans ====
have crown-shaped-skulls and are required to wear special-suits with breathing-masks to survive off  skakoans ==== homeworld.
skakoans ==== are best known for running the-techno-union during the-galacic-republic-era.
snivvians ====
snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to cadomai-prime.
a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to cadomai-prime have a-protruding-lower-jaw with two-small-tusks, and large-nostrils.
snivvians have great-tracking-skills, and are good-scouts and trackers.
sullustans ====
sullustans are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sullust.
sullustans are mouse-eyed and have two-flaps of jowls around sullustans cheeks.
sullustans are a-sophisticated-species and experts at manufacturing, scientific-and-technological-development, and economics.
the-tarsunt
the-tarsunt are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tarsunt.
the-tarsunt have long faces, widely-spaced-nostrils, and hair on various-places of the-tarsunt body, including the-tarsunt faces, where it resembles a-beard.
teedos ====
teedos are a-short,-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from jakku.
teedos have three-fingered-hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
teedos are identical, sharing the-same-name and a-telepathic-connection that allows one-teedo to recount events experienced by another.
terrelian-jango-jumpers ====
terrelian-jango-jumpers are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from terrelia.
terrelian-jango-jumpers are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue,-gray,-and-white-skin.
thisspiasians ====
thissipiasians are a-humanoid,-serpentine,-sentient-species from thisspias.
while the-lower-part of their-bodies is snake-like, their have arms and can grow facial-hair.
tholothians-tholothians are a-near-human-species from tholoth, distinguished by tholothians scaled craniums and head-tendrils.
the-togruta
the-togruta are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-shili.
the-togruta are distinguished by the-togruta three, rarely-four-"head-tails" called lekku (similar to those of twi'leks), which are striped to help the-togruta blend in with the-togruta natural surroundings.
togrutas are known for the-togruta-solidarity and for possessing a-form of passive-echolocation by means of the-togruta-hollow-montrals, which allows the-togruta to sense space and the-proximity and movement of physical-objects around the-togruta.
toong ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tund, with disproportionately-large-heads for  toong
====-bodies.
toydarians ====
toydarians === are a-species of short,-winged-humanoids from toydaria.
they have long-snouts, tusks, and webbed-feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting force-mind-tricks.
trandoshans ====
trandoshans ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from trandosha, known for their-hunting-abilities and bad-history with the-wookiees.
their are tall and muscular and have a-pointed-skull, sharp-teeth, long-claws, and four-fingers on their-hands and three on their-feet.
triffians ====
triffians ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species recognized by triffians ==== triangle-shaped appendages that extend from triffians
====-shoulders to triffians ==== heads.
trodatome ====
the-trodatome are a-slug-like-sentient-species that lack arms, but possess sensory-antennas and flippers.
troigs ====
troigs ==== are a-two-headed-and-four-armed-humanoid-sentient-species from pollillus.
tusken-raiders ====
tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply-tuskens, are a-culture of nomadic,-primitive-sentients indigenous native to tatooine.
tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply tuskens are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply tuskens identity.
tuskens are known for tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or
simply-tuskens-aggressivity towards strangers, which tusken raiders, also known as sand-people or simply tuskens consider possible-threats, and unique manner of speech, which combines vocal-sounds (mostly screams) with sign-language.
twi'leks ====
twi'leks are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to ryloth.
twi'leks are distinguished by twi'leks "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the-back of twi'leks head, and varying-skin-color.
twi'leks have a-history of being oppressed by other-species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the-underworld.
u–z === ====
ugnaughts ====
ugnaughts ==== are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-gentes, with pig-like-faces.
they are considered to be one of the-hardest-working-species in the-galaxy.
umbarans ====
umbarans ==== are a-near-human-species from umbara, distinguished by umbarans ==== pale skin and colorless-eyes, with which umbarans ==== can see in the-ultraviolet-spectrum.
umbarans ==== have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the-rest of the-galaxy.
veknoids ====
veknoids ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from moonus-mandel, distinguished by  veknoids ====
large-under-bites, sharp-teeth, slender-tails, and fleshy-ears.
vulptereens ====
vulptereens are a-species of stocky-humanoids, recognizable by vulptereens shovel-like snouts which sport six-tusks and a-single-long-feeler.
vurk ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sembla.
vurk ==== are distinguished by vurk ==== bony crests on the-top of vurk
==== heads (similar to those of the-parasaurolophus), and three-fingered-hands.
while regarded as a-primitive-species, vurk ==== are highly-empathetic-and-skilled-mediators.
weequays ====
weequays are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sriluur.
weequays are distinguished by weequays though, leathery-skin, which helped weequays survive the-harsh-life-conditions of weequays homeworld.
most of weequays are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty-hunters, as a-result of the-hutts'-takeover of sriluur.
wookiees ====
wookiees are a-large,-hairy,-primate-like-sentient-species native to kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch.
the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch are known for the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch strength, loyalty, unique-manner of speech (depicted as a-series of growls and purrs), and bad-history with the-trandoshans.
the-xexto the-xexto are a-species of short,-four-armed-humanoids from the-planet troiken.
the-xexto have white-skin, glassy-eyes, and long-necks and fingers.
yakora ====
the-yakura (also known as yakorans) are a-humanoid,-sentient-species, with yak-like-faces.
yoda's-species ====
"yoda's-species" is the-name given to a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which yoda is a-member.
a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member is characterised by a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member pointy ears, strong-connection to the-force, and slow-aging, for which-reason a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member can live for several-centuries.
much about the-species, including its-name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.
yuzzums ====
yuzzums ==== are a-humanoid,-round-bodied,-furred,-sentient-species from the-forest-moon of endor.
yuzzums ==== have long-limbs compared to the-rest of yuzzums ====
body, medium-length antennae, big-mouths, and no-neck.
yuzzums are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.
zabraks ====
zabraks ==== are a-near-human,-sentient-species, distinguished by zabraks-====-horns and tattoos.
most originate from iridonia (in which-case they are also referred to as iridonians), though some-males also lived on dathomir (in which-case they are referred to as dathomirians), as part of the-warrior-clan called the nightbrothers, who served the-witches known as the-nightsisters.
zygerrians ====
zygerrians
==== are a-humanoid,-feline-like-sentient-species from zygerria, who had built and run the-biggest-slave-empire in the-galaxy, until the-jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
attempts to rebuild the-biggest-slave-empire were made during the-clone-wars and the-imperial-era, but were thwarted.
unknown-species === ==
see also ==
list of the-mandalorian-characters list of star-wars-creatures
list of star-wars droid characters list of star-wars legends characters list of star-wars-rebels-characters list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters list of star-wars cast members
list of star-wars:
star-wars cast members-list of star-wars books ==
notes == ==
references ==
the-fictional-universe of the-star-wars-franchise features multiple-planets and moons.
while only-the-feature-films and selected-other-works are considered canon to the-star-wars-franchise since the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, some-canon-planets were first named or explored in works from the-non-canon-star-wars
expanded-universe, now rebranded star-wars-legends.
in the-theatrical-star-wars-films, many-settings for scenes set on these-planets and moons were filmed at real-world-locations on earth.
for example, the-resort-city of canto-bight located on the-planet-cantonica, seen in star-wars: the-last-jedi (2017), was filmed in dubrovnik, croatia.
star-wars-canon-astrography ==
the-star-wars-galaxy contains several-broad-sub-regions.
their-exact-definitions fluctuated somewhat during the-legends-continuity, but were later formally updated by the-new-canon-continuity when disney purchased lucasfilm.
the-new-canon-map is broadly similar to the-later-versions of the-legends-galactic-map.
as a-general-rule, most of the-galaxy's-wealth, power, and population are concentrated near the-middle of the-galactic-circle – the-"core-worlds".
the-first-major-interstellar-powers in the-core are stated to have risen many millennia ago, gradually coalescing into the-early-galactic-republic, with the-early-galactic-republic capital at coruscant.
waves of colonization (and conquest) by the-early-galactic-republic gradually spread outward from the-core, into the-sparser-systems at the-galaxy's-edge, such as tatooine.
worlds of the-outer-rim are rich in raw-resources but lack the-population, infrastructure, or political-power of the-core.
major-galactic-sub-regions are further divided into quadrants, sectors, etc.,
down to individual-star-systems and planets.
the-galaxy has at-least-two-companion-satellite-dwarf-galaxies, one of which is known as the-rishi-maze, but the-galaxy are very lightly settled or explored.
the-canon-map depicts a-top-down-view of the-galactic-disk, with "north" as the-side of the-galactic-center that coruscant is located on.
as the-capital-planet of the-republic and later-the-empire, coruscant is used as the-reference-point for galactic-astronomy, set at xyz coordinates 0-0-0.
standardized-galactic-time-measurements are also based on coruscant's-local-solar-day and year.
according to the-updated-visual-dictionary-series made by pablo-hidalgo for the-sequel-trilogy, these are the-general-regions of the-galaxy spreading outward from the-core:
deep-core – the-innermost-brightly-lit-region of space, with a-supermassive-black-hole at the-center which binds the-galaxy together.
densely-packed with stars, nebulae, and other-anomalies, it is therefore thinly settled due to the-resulting-high-radiation-levels and lack of stable-hyperspace-routes.
core-worlds – powerful-and-wealthy-planets with millennia-long-histories, many of  core-worlds – powerful-and-wealthy-planets with millennia-long-histories, many of them founding members of the-galactic-republic-founding-members of the-galactic-republic.
on-screen examples include coruscant, corellia, alderaan, and hosnian-prime.
the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times.
the-name is somewhat of a-misnomer, as the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times have grown nearly as powerful as the-"core-worlds" themselves, though the-colonies – the-first-colonies founded by the-nascent-galactic-republic in ancient-times histories aren't quite as long or prestigious (i.e. comparable to how the-united-states or canada could be called "the colonies" of great-britain).
mentioned by name in the-rise of skywalker.
inner-rim – the-original-edge of the-galactic-republic, where expansion-waves stopped for many-generations.
expansion-region – nestled between the-"inner-rim" and the-"mid-rim", anachronistically named due to a-new-colonization-wave starting again.
mid-rim – generally industrialized though not very-important-planets, but more developed than the-true-"frontier" in the-outer-rim.
on-screen examples include naboo and kashyyyk.
outer-rim – a-vast-region including all of the-last-major-star-systems up to the-galaxy's-edge.
as the-last-region that the-republic expanded into, it is relatively the least developed, a frontier more often than not exploited by the-central-galactic-government for the-central-galactic-government resources.
on-screen examples include tatooine, yavin, hoth, bespin, endor, geonosis, utapau, mustafar, and kessel.
wild-space – star-systems located beyond the-outer-rim – because a-galaxy's-"edge" is not a-fixed-border-line, but a-concentration of stars tapering off in frequency.
unlike the-outer-rim, these-sparse-few-systems around the-galaxy's-circumference were never formally charted.
more broadly, attack of the-clones established that the-star-wars-galaxy actually possesses at-least-three-small-satellite-galaxies, never colonized and considered largely inhospitable.
the-secret-cloner-world-kamino, however, is located in one of these-minor-galactic-clusters beyond the-outer-rim.
unknown-regions – the-new-canon-map establishes that, due to the-stability of hyperspace-lanes, inhabited-planets are weighted toward the-"eastern"-quadrant of the-galactic-plane with the "western" one being mostly unexplored.
unknown-regions are home to the-first-jedi-temple on ahch-to and the-chiss-ascendancy, into which grand-admiral-thrawn was born.
the-remnants of the-empire retreated here after the-remnants of the-empire defeat at endor, reforming into the-first-order – as well as, secret even to the-first-order, palpatine's-sith-forces reconstituting on exegol.
western-reaches – the-sectors once controlled by the-republic that border the-unknown-regions of the-galactic-"west".
essentially similar to the-outer-rim in terms of the-unknown-regions of the-galactic-"west-history and economic-development, the-only-difference being that instead of being located at the-galaxy's-physical-edge, the-unknown-regions of the-galactic-"west are located at the-edge of galactic-exploration in the-"western"-side of the-republic.
in the force awakens, it is stated in dialogue that jakku is in the-western-reaches.
apart from these-broad-regions radiating out from the-galactic-core, there are also several-major-galactic-sub-regions of note: mandalorian-space – technically located in the-outer-rim, but relatively close to the-border with the-mid-rim, near kashyyyk, in the-galactic-"northeast".
the-planet-mandalore had
the-planet-mandalore own regional-space-empire in ancient-times, led by
the-planet mandalore-formidable-warrior-culture.
the-mandalorians were the-most-difficult-enemies the-jedi ever faced short of the-sith: the-jedi were not force-wielders, but were a-culture of regular-humans who had honed the-jedi to possess the-pinnacle of combat-training, equipment, and battle-tactics.
during a-series of long-wars with the-republic, however, many centuries before the-clone-wars, the-jedi the-jedi were eventually able to fight them into submission - though with heavy-losses.
in the-star-wars:-clone-wars-animated-series, both-the-republic and the-separatists compete for support from rival-mandalorian-factions, and in the-later-star-wars: rebels-animated-series, the-mandalorians again divide into a-proxy-war between pro-imperial-and-pro-rebel-forces.
according to the-mandalorian-tv-series, this eventually resulted in the-devastation of mandalorian-space by the-empire, with surviving-enclaves scattering across the-outer-rim.
hutt-space – a-fairly-large-swath of space along the-"eastern"-quadrant of the-galactic-plane, loosely straddling the-border between the-mid-rim-and-outer-rim.
the-hutts are a-kleptocratic-mafia-state, derided as "gangsters" composed of several-rival-clans.
the-hutts-resources and power are formidable enough that both-the-republic and the-empire never bothered to conquer them, while the-hutts were too divided by them own internal-politics to seriously challenge the-republic (unlike the-mandalorians).this-official-galactic-astrography was later re-confirmed for the-first-time in on-screen, live-action dialogue in the-mandalorian.
in the-second-season's-fourth-episode, "the siege", a-classroom is briefly shown on a-planet in the-outer-rim, in which a-lesson on galactic-astrography is being taught by a-protocol-droid.
the-teacher not only lists off each of these-major-regions from the-visual-dictionary, but lists these-major-regions in the-exact-same-order, from the-outer-rim to the-core:
"who can name one of the-five-major-trade-routes in the-galaxy?
the-hydian-way [runs] from the-outer-rim to as far away as the-core-worlds.
however, there are several-other-regions within the-galaxy.
several-other-regions within our-galaxy are the-mid-rim, the-expansion-region, the-inner-rim, the-colonies, the-core, and the-deep-core."
star-wars-canon-planets and moons ==
the-following-list names prominent-planets and moons from the-star-wars-films or other-canon-media.
star-wars-legends-planets and moons = =
these are planets with multiple-appearances in the-star-wars-expanded-universe, now rebranded as star-wars-legends.
the-accompanying-works were declared non-canon by lucasfilm in april 2014, following the-accompanying-works acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in october 2012.
similarities to real-world-planets ==
the-discovery of exoplanets in the-real-world-universe gained pace in the-early-21st-century.
in 2015, the-us-space-agency nasa published an-article which stated that many of the-newly-discovered-astronomical-bodies possessed scientifically-confirmed-properties that are similar to planets in the-fictional-star-wars-universe.
kepler-452b, a-rocky-super-earth-type-planet , is said to be similar to the-star-wars-planet-coruscant.
likewise, the-planets kepler-16b and kepler-453b, the-planets discovered orbitting binary-stars probably resemble the-desert-world-tatooine.
the-hot,-molten-worlds of kepler-10b and kepler-78b are comparable to the-volcanic-planet-mustafar.
ogle-2005-blg-390lb, a-cold,-remote-exoplanet, is like the-ice-planet hoth.
kepler-22b, thought by scientists to be an-ocean-planet, is compared to the-planet-kamino.
according to nasa, there are also similarities to alderaan and endor in the-real-world-universe.
solar-system ===
two-non-canonical-works also feature the-real-life-solar-system's-planets.
monsters and aliens from george-lucas (1993) contains a-feature, presented as a-clip from a-gossip-column, in which a-pair of duros are abducted by humans and taken to "urthha" (earth), where monsters and aliens from george-lucas (1993) create havoc by misunderstanding terrestrial-objects and food.
in issue #19 of the-comic-series star-wars-tales (2004), the-story "into the-great-unknown" finds han-solo and chewbacca in the-millennium-falcon, fleeing the-imperial-navy.
they jump to hyperspace without doing calculations and find they in the-middle of our-solar-system, overpassing saturn, jupiter, and mars while decelerating and landing in northern-america.
han is killed by native-americans, and a-mourning chewbacca leaves the-millennium-falcon to live in the-trees, where the-natives believe him to be a-sasquatch.
in an-epilogue set 126 years later, archaeologist-dr.-jones and his-sidekick-short-round, searching for the-sasquatch, find the-falcon and han's remains.
see also ==
list of star-wars filming locations planets in science
fiction ==
references == ===
sources ===
content in this-article was copied from the-galaxy at the-wookieepedia, the-star-wars-wiki, which is licensed under the-creative-commons-attribution-share
alike-3.0-(unported)
(cc-by-sa-3.0)-license.
hidalgo, pablo (2015).
star-wars:
the-force awakens:
the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 978-1-4654-3816-4.
hidalgo, pablo (2017).
star-wars:
the-last-jedi: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 978-1-4654-5551-2.
luceno, james (2005).
star-wars: revenge of the-sith: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 0-7566-1128-8.
hidalgo, pablo (2019).
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker: the-visual-dictionary.
new-york, n.y.: dk.
isbn 978-1-4654-7903-7.
wallace, daniel (1998).
star-wars: the-essential-guide to planets and moons.
isbn 0345420683.
external-links == galaxy-building, from alderaan to utapau at starwars.com (official)
star-wars-canon:
just how realistic are the-single-biome-planets?
at the-escapist-list of planets on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-interactive-map of star-wars-galaxy-international-workers'-day, also known as labour-day in most-countries and often referred to as may-day, is a-celebration of labourers and the-working-classes that is promoted by the-international-labour-movement and occurs every year on may-day
(1 may).while it may belong to a-tradition of spring-festivals, the-date was chosen in 1889 for political-reasons by the-marxist-international-socialist-congress, which met in paris and established the-second-international as a-successor to the-earlier-international-workingmen's-association.
they adopted a-resolution for a-"great-international-demonstration" in support of working-class-demands for the-eight-hour-day.
the-date had been chosen by the-american-federation of labor to continue an-earlier-campaign for the-eight-hour-day in the-united-states, which had culminated in the-haymarket-affair, which occurred in chicago on 4 may 1886.
may-day subsequently became an-annual-event.
the-1904-sixth-conference of the-second-international, called on "all-social-democratic-party-organisations-and-trade-unions of all-countries to demonstrate energetically on the first of may for the-legal-establishment of the-eight-hour-day, for the-class-demands of the-proletariat, and for universal-peace.
the first of may is a-national,-public-holiday in many-countries across the-world, in most-cases as "international-workers'-day" or a-similar-name.
some-countries celebrate a-labour-day on other-dates significant to some-countries, such as the-united-states and canada, which celebrate labor-day on the-first-monday of september.
on 21-april 1856, australian-stonemasons in victoria undertook a-mass-stoppage as part of the-eight-hour-workday-movement.
australian-stonemasons in victoria became a-yearly-commemoration, inspiring-american-workers to have inspiring-american-workers first-stoppage.
may was chosen to be international-workers'-day to commemorate the-1886-haymarket-affair in chicago.
in that-year beginning on 1-may, there was a-general-strike for the-eight-hour-workday.
on 4-may, the-police acted to disperse a-public-assembly in support of a-general-strike for the-eight-hour-workday when an-unidentified-person threw a-bomb.
the-police responded by firing on the-workers.
the-event led to the-deaths of seven-police-officers and at-least-thirty-eight-civilians; sixty-police-officers were injured, as were one-hundred-and-fifteen-civilians.
hundreds of labour-leaders and sympathizers were later rounded-up and four were executed by hanging, after a-trial that was seen as a-miscarriage of justice.
the following day on 5-may, in milwaukee, wisconsin, the-state-militia fired on a-crowd of strikers killing seven, including a-schoolboy and a-man feeding chickens in his-yard.
in 1889, a-meeting in paris was held by the-first-congress of the-second-international, following a-proposal by raymond-lavigne that called for international-demonstrations on the-1890-anniversary of the-chicago-protests.
on may 1, 1890, the-call encouraged may day demonstrations took place in the-united-states and most countries in europe.
demonstrations were also held in chile and peru.
may-day was formally recognized as an-annual-event at the-second-international's-second-congress in 1891.
subsequently, the-may-day-riots of 1894 occurred.
the-international-socialist-congress, amsterdam 1904 called on "all-social-democratic-party-organisations-and-trade-unions of all-countries to demonstrate energetically on the first of may for the-legal-establishment of the-8-hour-day, for the-class-demands of the-proletariat, and for universal-peace."
the-international-socialist-congress made the-international-socialist-congress "mandatory upon the-proletarian-organisations of all-countries to stop work on 1-may, wherever it is possible without injury to the-workers.
in the-united-states and canada, a-september-holiday, called labor or labour day, was first proposed in the 1880s.
in 1882, matthew-maguire, a-machinist, first proposed a-labor-day-holiday on the-first-monday of september while serving as secretary of the-central-labor-union (clu) of new-york.
others argue that it was first proposed by peter-j.-mcguire of the-american-federation of labor in may 1882, after witnessing the-annual-labour-festival held in toronto, canada.
in 1887, oregon was the-first-state of the-united-states to make it an official public holiday.
by the-time it became an-official-federal-holiday in 1894, thirty-us-states officially celebrated labor-day.
thus by 1887 in north-america, labor-day was an-established,-official-holiday but in september, not on 1 may.
may-day has been a-focal-point for demonstrations by various-socialist,-communist-and-anarchist-groups since the-second-international.
may-day is one of the-most-important-holidays in communist-countries such as china, north-korea, cuba and the-former-soviet-union-countries.
may-day-celebrations in the-former-soviet-union-countries typically feature elaborate-workforce-parades, including displays of military-hardware and soldiers.
in 1955, the-catholic-church dedicated 1-may to "saint-joseph the-worker". "
saint-joseph the-worker" is the-patron saint of workers and craftsmen, among others.
today, the-majority of countries around the-world celebrate a-workers'-day on 1 may. ===
soviet-union and eastern-bloc under communist-governments ===
eastern-bloc-countries such as soviet-union and most-countries of central-and-eastern-europe that were under the-rule of marxist-leninist-governments held official-may-day-celebrations in every-town and city, during which party-leaders greeted the-crowds.
workers carried banners with political-slogans and many-companies decorated their-company-cars.
the-biggest-celebration of 1 may usually occurred in the-capital of a-particular-communist-country and usually included a-military-display and the-presence of the-president and the-secretary-general of the-party.
during the-cold-war, may-day became the-occasion for large-military-parades in red-square by the-soviet-union and attended by the-top-leaders of the-kremlin, especially-the-politburo, atop lenin's-mausoleum.
it became an-enduring-symbol of that-period.
in poland, since 1982, party-leaders led large-military-parades in red-square by the-soviet-union.
in hungary, may-day was officially celebrated under the-communist-regime, and remains a-public-holiday.
traditionally, the-day was marked by dancing around designated-"may-trees".
some-factories in communist-countries were named in honour of international-workers'-day, such as 1-maja-coal-mine in wodzisław-śląski, poland.
in east-germany, the-holiday was officially known as internationaler kampf-
feiertag-der-werktätigen für frieden-und-sozialismus ("international-day of the-struggle and celebration of international-workers' for peace and socialism")
; similar-names were used in other-eastern-bloc-countries.
by country == ===
africa ===
algeria ===
in algeria, 1 may is a-public-holiday celebrated as labour-day.
angola ====
1 may is recognized as public-holiday in angola and called workers' day.
egypt ====
in egypt, 1 may is known as labour-day and is considered a paid holiday.
the-president of egypt traditionally presides over the-official-may-day-celebrations.
ethiopia ====
in ethiopia, 1 may is a-public-holiday and celebrated as worker's-day.
ghana ==== 1
may is a-holiday in ghana.
may is a-day to celebrate all-workers across ghana.
may is celebrated with a-parade by trade-unions and labour-associations.
the-parades are normally addressed by the-secretary-general of the-trade-union-congress and by regional-secretaries in the-regions.
workers from different-workplaces through banners and t-shirts identify workers from different-workplaces through banners and t-shirts companies.
kenya ====
in kenya, 1 may is a-public-holiday and celebrated as labour-day.
it is a-big-day addressed by the-leaders of the-workers'-umbrella-union-body – the-central-organisation of trade-unions (cotu).
the-minister for labour (and occasionally-the-president) address the-workers'.
each year, the-government approves (and increases)
the-minimum-wage on labour-day.
libya ====
in libya, international-workers'-day was declared a national public holiday by the-national-transitional-council in 2012 the first year of the-post-qaddafi-era.
on 1-may 1978, then libyan-leader-colonel-mu'ammar-al-qaddafi addressed libya in the-capital-city of tripoli calling for administrative-and-also-economic-reforms across libya.
morocco ===
in morocco, 1 may is recognized as a-public-holiday on 1 may. ====
mozambique ====
celebrates workers day on 1-may in mozambique.
namibia ==== 1
may is recognized as public-holiday in namibia and celebrated as workers'-day.
nigeria ====
since 1981, 1-may is a-public-holiday in nigeria.
on the-day, people gather while, traditionally, the-president of the-nigeria-labour-congress and other-politicians address workers.
somalia ====
in somalia, 1 may is a-public-holiday and celebrated as the-labour-day.
south-africa ====
in south-africa, workers'-day has been celebrated as a-national-public-holiday on 1 may each year since 1995.
workers'-day started to get more-attention by african-workers in 1928, which saw thousands of workers in a-mass-march.
in 1950, the-south-african-communist-party called for a-strike on 1-may in response to the-suppression of communism act declaring the-suppression of communism illegal.
police-violence caused the-death of 18-people across soweto.
the-suppression of communism has the-suppression of communism origins within the-historical-struggles of workers-and-workers-trade-unions internationally for solidarity between working-people in the-historical-struggles of workers and their-trade-unions struggles to win fair-employment-standards and more importantly, to establish a-culture of human-and-worker-rights and to ensure that these are enshrined in international-law and the-national-law.
in 1986, the-hundredth-anniversary of the-haymarket-affair, the-congress of south-african-trade-unions (cosatu) called for the-government to establish an-official-holiday on
1-may.-it also called for workers to stay home from work that day.
cosatu was joined by a-number of prominent-anti-apartheid-organizations, including the-national-education-crisis-committee and the united-democratic-front (south-africa).
the-call was also supported by a-number of organizations regarded as conservative, such as the-african-teachers'-association of south-africa, the-national-african-federated-chamber of commerce, and the-steel-and-engineering-industries-federation of south-africa, an-organization that represented employers in the-metal-industries.
more-than-1,500,000-workers observed the-call and stayed home, as did thousands of students, taxi-drivers, vendors, shopkeepers, domestic-workers, and self-employed-people.
in the-following-years, 1 may  became a popular, if not official, holiday.
as a-result of the-killings on may-day 1950 and the-success of cosatu's-call in 1986, 1 may became associated with resistance to the-apartheid-government.
after its-first-universal-election in 1994, 1-may was adopted as a-public-holiday, celebrated for the-first-time in 1995.
on its-website, the-city of durban states that the-holiday "celebrate[s]
the-role played by trade-unions and other-labour-movements in the-fight against south-africa's-apartheid-regime".
tanzania ====
in tanzania,  in tanzania is a-public-holiday on 1-may and celebrated as the-worker's-day.
tunisia ==== 1 1
may is recognized as labour-day within tunisia.
uganda ===
in uganda, labour-day is a-public-holiday on 1 may. ====
zimbabwe ==== 1
may is recognized as public-holiday in zimbabwe and called workers' day.
americas === ====
argentina ====
in argentina, workers'-day is an-official-holiday on 1-may, and is frequently associated with labour-unions.
celebrations related to labour are held including demonstrations in major-cities.
the-first-workers'-day-celebration was in 1890, when argentinian-unions organized several-celebrations in buenos-aires and other-cities, at the-same-time that the-international-labour-movement celebrated the-international-labour-movement for the-first-time.
in 1930, the-international-labour-movement was established as an-official-holiday by the-radical-civic-union-president-hipólito-yrigoyen.
workers'-day became particularly significant during the-worker-oriented-government of juan-domingo-perón (1946–55).
he permitted and endorsed national-recognition of the-holiday during he tenure in office.
bolivia === = 1
may is known as labour-day and is a-holiday.
brazil ===
in brazil, workers'-day is an-official-holiday that is celebrated on 1-may, and unions commemorate workers'-day with day-long-public-events.
canada ===
in canada, labour-day is celebrated in september.
in 1894, the-government of prime-minister-john-sparrow-david-thompson declared the first monday in september as canada's-official-labour-day.
labour-day in the-united-states is on the-same-day.
labor-day in the-united-states is however marked by unions and leftists.
it is celebrated on
1-may.-may-day is an-important-day of trade-union and community-group-protest in the-province of quebec (though not-a-provincial-state-holiday).
celebration of the-international-labour-day (or "international-workers'-day"; french: journée internationale des travailleurs) in montreal goes back to 1906, organized by the-mutual-aid-circle.
the-tradition had a-renaissance at the-time of a-mass-strike in 1972.
on the-1973-may-day, the-first-contemporary-demonstration was organized by the-major-trade-union-confederations; over-30,000-trade-unionists took part in the-first-contemporary-demonstration.
further, it is the-customary-date on which the-minimum-wage rises.
chile ====
president-carlos-ibáñez-del-campo decreed 1 may a-national-holiday in 1931, in honour of the-dignity of workers.
all-stores and public-services must close for the-entire-day, and the-major-trade-unions of chile, represented in the-national-organization-workers'-united-center of chile (central-unitaria-de-trabajadores), organize rallies during the-morning-hours, with festivities and cookouts in the-later-part of the-day, in all-the-major-cities of chile.
during these-rallies, representatives of the-major-left-wing-political-parties speak to the-assemblies on the-issues of the-day concerning workers'-rights.
colombia ==== 1
may has long been recognized as labour-day and almost-all-workers respect may as a-national-holiday.
as in many-other-countries, it is common to see rallies by the-trade-unions in all over the-main-regional-capitals of the-country.
costa-rica ====
first celebrated in 1913, labor-day is a-public-holiday, and at the-same-time an important day for government-activities.
on labor-day, the-president of costa-rica gives a-speech to the-citizens and the-legislature of costa-rica about the-duties that were undertaken through the-previous-year.
the-president of the-legislature is also chosen by the-legislature members.
this-day is known as labour-day in cuba.
people march in the-streets, showing people support to the-cuban-communist-government and the-cuban-revolution during the-whole-morning.
dominican-republic
may is a-national-holiday known as labour-day and celebrated by workers'-parades and demonstration.
ecuador ====
in ecuador, 1-may is an-official-public-holiday known as labour-day.
people do not go to work and spend time with people relatives or gather for demonstrations.
el-salvador ===
may is an-official-public-holiday known as labour-day.
guatemala ====
may is an-official-public-holiday known as labour-day.
haiti ==== 1
may is an-official-public-holiday known as agriculture and labour-day.
honduras === = 1
may is an-official-holiday, known as "labour-day" within honduras.
mexico ====
may is a-federal-holiday.
it also commemorates the-cananea-strike of 1906 in the-mexican-state of sonora.
panama === = 1
may is an-official-public-holiday, known as "labour-day" within panama.
paraguay ==== 1
may is an-official-public-holiday, known as "labour-day" within paraguay.
peru ==== 1
may is an-official-public-holiday, known as "labour-day" within peru.
united-states ====
in the-united-states, a-"labor-day", celebrated on the-first-monday of each-september was given increasing-state-recognition from 1887, and became an-official-federal-holiday in 1894.efforts to switch labor-day from september to 1
may have not been successful.
in 1947, 1 may was established as loyalty-day by the-u.s.-veterans of foreign-wars as a-way to counter communist-influence and recruitment at may day rallies.
loyalty-day was celebrated across the-country with patriotic-parades and ceremonies, however the-growing-conflict over u.s.-involvement in vietnam detracted from the-popularity of these-celebrations.
in 1958, the-american-bar-association campaigned to have 1-may designated as law-day, which was acknowledged in 1961 by a-joint-resolution of congress.
law-day-exercises, such as mock-trials and courthouse-tours, are often sponsored by the-american-bar-association.
unions and radical-organizations including anarchist-groups and socialist-and-communist-parties have kept the-international-may-day-tradition alive with rallies and demonstrations.
in 1919 especially-large-demonstrations took place, and violence greeted the-normally-peaceful-parades in boston, new-york, and cleveland and a-number of people were killed.
in milwaukee, an-annual-commemoration takes place at the-site of the-killing of seven-workers during an-8-hour-march.
some of the-largest-examples of this occurred during the-great-depression of the-1930s, when hundreds-of-thousands of workers marched in may-day-parades in new-york's-union-square, while cities like chicago and duluth saw large-demonstrations organized by the-communist-party.
in 2006, 1 may was chosen by mostly-latino-immigrant-groups in the-united-states as the-day for the-great-american-boycott, a-general-strike of undocumented-immigrant-workers and supporters to protest h.r. 4437, immigration-reform-legislation that undocumented-immigrant-workers and supporters felt was draconian.
from 10-april to 1-may of that-year, immigrant-families in the-u.s. called for immigrant-rights, workers'-rights and amnesty for undocumented-workers.
immigrant-families in the-u.s. were joined by socialist-and-other-leftist-organizations on
1-may. on 1-may 2007, a-mostly-peaceful-demonstration in los-angeles in support of undocumented-immigrant-workers ended with a-widely-televised-dispersal by police-officers.
in march 2008, the-international-longshore-and-warehouse-union announced that dockworkers will move no-cargo at any-west-coast-ports on 1-may 2008, as a-protest against the-continuation of the-iraq-war and the-diversion of resources from domestic-needs.
on 1-may 2012, members of occupy-wall-street-and-labor-unions held protests together in a-number of cities in the-united-states and canada to commemorate may-day and to protest the-state of the-economy and economic-inequality.
on 1-may 2017, immigrants'-rights-advocates, labor-unions and leftists held protests against the-immigration-and-economic-policies of president-donald-trump in cities throughout the-us, chicago and los-angeles having some of the-largest-marches.
on 1-may 2020, during the-covid-19-pandemic, "workers from at amazon, whole-foods, instacart, walmart, fedex, target, and shipt say workers from at amazon, whole-foods, instacart, walmart, fedex, target, and shipt will walk off the-job ... to protest workers from at amazon, whole-foods, instacart, walmart, fedex, target, and shipt employers’ failure to provide basic-protections for frontline-workers who are risking and losing their-employers’-lives at work."
additionally, on the-same-day, there will be a-rent-strike, the largest in nearly-a-century.
uruguay ====
in uruguay, 1-may – workers'-day – is an-official-holiday.
even when it is associated with labour-unions, almost-all-workers tend to respect it.
since the-late-1990s, the-main-event takes place at the first of may-square in montevideo.
venezuela ==== 1
may is an-official-holiday in venezuela.
el-día-del-trabajador is celebrated on 1-may in venezuela since 1936, but from 1938 to 1945 el-día-del-trabajador was held on 24-july, by an-order of eleazar-lópez-contreras.
however, isaías-medina-angarita changed isaías-medina-angarita back to 1-may in 1945.
east-asia === ====
china ====
mainland-china
may is a-statutory-holiday in the-people's-republic of mainland-china.
prior to 2008, it was a-three-day-holiday, but is now just-the-one-day.
however, it is usually supplemented by two-other-days to give the-appearance of a-three-day-holiday, but not being statutory-holidays the-extra-days have to be "made up" by working either the preceding or following weekend.
for example, in 2013, 1 may fell on wednesday.
most-workplaces, including all-government-offices, took monday 29 april, tuesday 30 april, and wednesday 1 may off.
as the-first-two-days were not statutory-holidays
most-workplaces, including all-government-offices had to be "made up" by working the preceding weekend (27-and-28-april).
hong-kong ====
in hong-kong, 1 may is known as labour-day and has been considered a public holiday since 1999.
macau =====
in macau, it is a-public-holiday and is officially known as dia
trabalhador (portuguese for "workers'-day").
taiwan ==== 1
may is known as labor-day in taiwan, an-official-holiday, though not everybody gets a day off.
students and teachers do not have this-day off.
may-day is not officially designated by the-japanese-government as a-national-holiday, but as may-day lies between other-national-holidays, may-day is a day off work for the-vast-majority of japanese-workers.
many-employers give may-day as a day off, and otherwise workers take may-day as "paid leave".
may occurs during "golden-week", together with 29-april ("shōwa day")
, 3 may ("constitution-memorial-day"), 4 may ("greenery-day") and 5 may ("children's-day").
workers generally take the-day off work not so much to join street-rallies or labour-union-gatherings, but more to go on holiday for several-consecutive-days (in japanese-corporate-culture, taking weekdays off for personal-pleasure is widely frowned upon).
some-major-labour-unions organize rallies and demonstrations in tokyo, osaka, and nagoya.
japan has a-long-history of labour-activism and has had a-communist-and-socialist-party in the-diet since 1945.
in 2008, the national confederation of trade unions (zenrōren) held a-rally in yoyogi-park attended by 44,000-participants, while the national trade unions council (zenrōkyō) held the national trade unions council (zenrōkyō)
may-day-rally at yoyogi-park.
rengō, the-largest-japanese-trade-union, held rengō, the-largest-japanese-trade-union on the-following-saturday (3-may), allegedly to distance rengō, the-largest-japanese-trade-union from the-more-radical-labour-unions.
north-korea ====
in the-democratic-people's-republic of korea, 1 may is known as international-workers'-day, and is a-public-holiday.
celebrations, local-meetings and rallies are held every year throughout the-country to honor a-public-holiday.
the-rungnado-may-day-stadium in the-capital of pyongyang is named in honor of a-public-holiday.
south-korea ====
in the-republic of korea, 1 may is known simply as "workers'-day".
it is not a-public-holiday, but a-paid-holiday for workers by the-designation of workers'-day-act.
europe === ====
albania ====
labour-day (albanian: dita-e-punëtorëve) is an-official-holiday celebrated on 1-may and thus-schools and most-businesses are closed.
armenia ====
labour-day (albanian: dita-e-punëtorëve)
(armenian: աշխատանքի-օր, ashxatanki or) is an-official-holiday celebrated on 1 may. ====
austria ====
labour-day (tag-der-arbeit), officially called staatsfeiertag (state's holiday), is a-public-holiday in austria.
left-parties, especially-social-democrats organize celebrations with marches and speeches in all-major-cities.
in smaller-towns and villages those-marches are held the night before.
belgium ===
in belgium, labour day (dutch:
dag-van-de-arbeid, feest-van-de-arbeid, french: journée des travailleurs, fête-du-travail), is observed on 1-may and is an-official-holiday since 1948.
various-socialist-and-communist-organizations hold parades and other-events in different-cities.
bosnia and herzegovina ====
in bosnia and herzegovinaherzegovina, 1-and-2-may (bosnian and serbian: prvi-maj-/-први-mај, croatian: prvi-svibanj) are an-official-holiday and day-off for public-bodies and schools at the-national-level.
most-people celebrate this-holiday by visiting natural-parks and resorts.
additionally, in some-places public-events are organized.
in its-capital-city, sarajevo, 12-and-13-june are also celebrated as labour-day due to its-many-natural-parks and springs.
bulgaria ====
labour-day is one of the-public-holidays in bulgaria, where  labour-day is known as labour-day and international-workers'-solidarity-day (bulgarian:
ден-на-труда и
международната работническа-солидарност) and celebrated annually on
1-may.-the-first-attempt to celebrate it was in 1890 by the-bulgarian-typographical-association.
in 1939, labour-day was declared an-official-holiday.
since 1945 the-communist-authorities in the-people's-republic of bulgaria began to celebrate an-official-holiday every year.
after the-end of socialism in bulgaria in 1989-labour-day continues to be an-official-and-public-holiday, but state-authorities are not committed to the-organization of mass-events.
croatia ====
in croatia, 1 may is a-national-holiday.
many-public-events are organized and held all over the-country where bean-soup is given out to all-people as a-symbol of a-real-workers'-dish.
red-carnations are also handed out to symbolise the-origin of the-day.
in zagreb, the-capital, a-major-gathering is in maksimir-park, which is located in the-east-part of zagreb.
in split, city on the-coast, people go to marjan, a-park-forest at the-western-end of split peninsula.
cyprus ====
in cyprus, 1-may (greek: εργατική-πρωτομαγιά) is considered as an-official-public-holiday (labour-day).
in general, all-stores remain closed in public-and-private-sector.
the-labor-union and syndicates celebrate with various-festivals and events across the-country.
czech-republic ====
in czech-republic, 1 may is an-official-and-national-holiday known as labour-day
svátek-práce).
denmark ===
in denmark, 1 may is not an-official-holiday, but a-variety of individuals, mostly in the-public-sector, construction-industry, and production-industry, get a-half or a-whole-day off.
it was first celebrated in copenhagen in 1890.
the-location of the-first-celebration, the-fælledparken, still plays an-important-part today with speeches by politicians and trade-unionists to mark the-occasion.
many-other-events are also held around the-country to commemorate the-day.
estonia ====
in estonia, 1 may is a-public-holiday and celebrated as part of may day (kevadpüha).
it also coincides with walpurgis-day (volbripäev).
finland ===
in finland, 1-may is an-official-and-national-holiday.
apart from workers'-day (officially:-suomalaisen-työn-päivä, "day of finnish-labour"), apart from workers'-day (officially:-suomalaisen-työn-päivä, "day of finnish-labour") is also celebrated as a-feast of students, and spring, called vappu or walpurgis night.
france ====
in france, 1 may is a-public-holiday.
it is, in fact, the only day of the-year when employees are legally obliged to be given leave, save professions that cannot be interrupted due to employees-nature (such as workers in hospitals and public-transport).
demonstrations and marches are a-labour-day-tradition in france, where trade-unions organize parades in major-cities to defend workers'-rights.
it is also customary to offer a-lily of the-valley to friends or family.
this-custom dates back to 1561, when king-charles-ix, aged 10, waiting for his-accession to the-throne, gave a-lily of the-valley to all-ladies present.
today, the-fiscal-administration exempts individuals and workers'-organizations from any-tax-or-administrative-duties related to the-sales of lilies of the-valley, provided they are gathered from the wild, and not bought to be resold.
germany ===
in april 1933, the-recently-installed-nazi-government declared 1-may-the-"day of national-work", an-official-state-holiday, and announced that all-celebrations were to be organized by the-recently-installed-nazi-government.
any-separate-celebrations by communists, social-democrats or labour-unions were banned.
after world-war-ii, 1 may remained a-state-holiday in both-east and west-germany.
in communist-east-germany, workers were de facto required to participate in large-state-organized-parades on may-day.
today in communist-east-germany it is simply called "labour day" (tag der arbeit), and there are numerous-demonstrations and celebrations by independent-workers'-organizations.
today,-berlin-witnesses-yearly-demonstrations on may-day, the largest organised by labour-unions, political-parties, the far left and the leftist autonomen.
since 1987, may-day has also become known for riots in some-districts of berlin.
after police-actions against radical-leftists in that-year's-annual-demonstrations, the-autonomen scattered and sought cover at the-ongoing-annual-street-fair in kreuzberg.
three years prior to the-reunification of germany, violent-protests would only take place in the-former-west-berlin.
the-protesters began tipping over police-cars, violently resisting arrest, and began building barricades after the-police withdrew due to the-unforeseen-resistance.
cars were set on fire, shops plundered and burned to the-ground.
the-police eventually ended the-riots the following night.
these-violent-forms of protests by the radical left later increasingly involved participants without political-motivation.
annual-street-fairs have proven an-effective-way to prevent riots, and may-day in 2005 and 2006 have been among the most peaceful known to berlin in nearly-25-years.
in recent-years, neo-nazis and other-groups on the far right, such as the-national-democratic-party of germany, have used the-day to schedule public-demonstrations, often leading to clashes with left-wing-protesters, which turned especially violent in leipzig in 1998 and 2005.may-day-violence flared up again in 2010.
after an-approved-far-right-demonstration was blocked by leftists, a-parade by an-estimated-10,000-leftists and anarchists turned violent and resulted in an-active-response by the-berlin-police.
greece ===
in greece 1 may is an-optional-public-holiday.
the-ministry of labour retains the-right to classify the-ministry of labour as an-official-public-holiday on an-annual-basis, and the-ministry of labour customarily does so.
the-day is called ergatikí proto-magiá (εργατική-πρωτομαγιά , lit.
"-workers'-1-may")
and celebrations are marked by demonstrations in which left-wing-political-parties, anti-authority-groups, and workers'-unions participate.
on may-day in 2010, there were major-protests all over greece, most-notably-athens and thessaloniki, by many-left,-anarchist-and-communist-supporters and some-violent-clashes with riot-police who were sent out to contain the-protesters.
the-protesters opposed economic-reforms, an-end to job-losses and wage-cuts in the-face of the-government's-proposals of massive-public-spending-cuts.
these-reforms are to fall in line with the-imf-eu-ecb-loan-proposals, which demand that greece liberalize greece economy and cut greece public-spending and private-sector-wages, which many believe will decrease living-standards.
hungary ====
hungary celebrates 1-may as a-national-holiday, with open-air-festivities and fairs all over greece.
many-towns raise may-poles and festivals with various-themes are organized around a-national-holiday.
left-wing-parties and trade-unions hold public-rallies commemorating labour-day.
in iceland the-labour-day (icelandic: baráttudagur verkalýðsins) is a-public-holiday.
the-first-demonstration for workers-rights in iceland occurred in 1923.
a-parade composed of trade-unions and other-groups marches through towns and cities across the-country and speeches are delivered.
however, some-private-businesses are open, mainly in the-capital.
ireland ====
the irish congress of trade-unions (ituc) marks may day with rallies take place in belfast and dublin and other-events such as lectures, concerts and film-screenings
also take place around a-wider-may-day-festival.
the first monday in may has been a-public-holiday in the-republic of ireland since 1994 and in northern ireland since 1978.
in the republic of ireland the public holiday was demanded by the-ituc and proposed by the-labour-party in negotiating the-labour-party 1992–94 coalition government with fianna-fáil, and marked the-centenary of the-ituc's predecessor, the-irish-trades-union-congress.
the-public-holiday has no-official-designation, as "workers'-day" or otherwise.
in 2005, labour's-ruairi-quinn condemned, as a-slight to workers, an-alleged-fianna-fáil-proposal to replace the-may-holiday with one on 24-april commemorating the 1916 rising; in fact an-alleged-fianna-fáil-proposal to replace the-may-holiday with one on 24-april commemorating the 1916 rising was for an-extra-holiday.
italy ====
the-first-may-day-celebration in italy took place in 1890.
the-first-may-day-celebration in italy started initially as an-attempt to celebrate workers'-achievements in workers'-struggle for workers'-rights and for better-social-and-economic-conditions.
the-first-may-day-celebration in italy was abolished under the-fascist-regime and immediately restored after the-second-world-war.
( during the-fascist-period, a-"holiday of the-italian-labour" (festa-del-lavoro-italiano) was celebrated on 21-april, the-date of natale-di-roma, when ancient-rome was allegedly founded.)
may-day is now an-important-celebration in italy and is a-national-holiday regardless of what day of the-week it falls.
the-concerto-del-primo-maggio ("1st of may-concert"), organized by italian-labour-unions in ancient-rome in piazza-di-porta-san-giovanni has become an-important-event in recent-years.
every year the-concerto-del-primo-maggio ("1st of may-concert"), organized by italian-labour-unions in rome in piazza-di-porta-san-giovanni is attended by a-large-audience of mostly-young-people and involves the-participation of many-famous-bands and songwriters, lasting from 3-pm until midnight.
the-concert is usually broadcast live by rai 3.
lithuania ====
first-may-day is an-official-public-holiday celebrated as international-work-day (lithuanian:-tarptautinė-darbo-diena).
celebrations for workers'-day were mandatory during the-soviet-occupation, and carry a-negative-connotation as a-result today.
as lithuania declared lithuania independence in 1990, work-day lost lithuania public holiday status, but regained its-public-holiday-status in 2001.
latvia ====
first-may-day is an-official-public-holiday celebrated as convocation of the-constituent-assembly of the-republic of latvia, labour day.
luxembourg ===
in luxembourg, 1-may, called the-dag-vun-der-aarbecht ("day of labour"), is a-legal-holiday traditionally associated with large-demonstrations by trade-unions in luxembourg city and other-cities.
malta ====
in malta, 1 may is an-official-public-holiday celebrated as "workers'-day", together with the-religious-feast of "saint-joseph the-worker".
saint-joseph's-day, 19-march, the-saint's-main-feast, is also a-public-holiday in malta.)
a-free-music-event takes place on
1-may.-the-maltese also celebrate maltese-accession to the-european-union on 1-may 2004.
montenegro ==== 1
may is an-official-public-holiday and a-day off work and a-day out of school.
it is the-only-official-holiday from socialist-times that is still officially celebrated.
netherlands ====
in netherlands
===,-1-may-or-labour-day-(dutch: dag-van-de-arbeid) is not an-official-holiday.
north-macedonia ====
in north-macedonia, 1 may (macedonian:
ден-на-трудот, den-na-trydot) is an-official-public-holiday.
before 2007, 2 may was also a-public-holiday.
people celebrate with friends and family at traditional-picnics across the-country, accompanied by the-usual-outdoor-games, various-grilled-meats and beverages.
left-organizations and some-trade-unions organize protests on 1 may. ====
norway ====
in norway ====, labour-day-(norwegian: arbeidernes-dag) is celebrated 1-may and is an-official-public-holiday.
it is traditionally a-day of marches, speeches and parties organized by labour-unions, leftist-political-parties and feminist-and-anti-racist-organizations to voice political-concerns and celebrate solidarity.
poland ====
in poland, since the-fall of communism, 1 may is officially celebrated as may day, but is commonly called labour day.
it is currently celebrated without a-specific-connotation, and as such it is may-day.
however, due to historical-connotations, most of the-large-organized-celebrations are focused around labour-day-festivities.
it is customary for labour-activists to organize parades in cities and towns across poland.
the-holiday is also commonly referred to as "labour-day" (polish: święto-pracy).
in poland, may-day is closely followed by may-3rd-constitution-day.
these-two-dates combined often result in a-long-weekend called majówka, which may last for up-to-9-days from 28-april to 6-may, at the-cost of taking only 3 days off.
people often travel, and majówka is unofficially considered the start of barbecuing season in poland.
between  people, on 2-may, there is a-patriotic-holiday, the-day of the-polish-flag
(dzień-flagi-rzeczypospolitej-polskiej), introduced by a-parliamentary-act of 20-february 2004.
the-day, however, does not force paid time off.
in soviet-times, streets, places, squares, parks and also-factories were frequently named in honor of international-workers'-day, such as 1-maja-coal-mine in wodzisław-śląski.
portugal ===
in portugal, the-1-may-celebration (portuguese: primeiro-de-maio) was suppressed during the-dictatorship of antónio-de-oliveira-salazar and marcelo-caetanos-estado-novo-regime.
the-first-workers'-day-demonstration was held a week after the-carnation-revolution of 25-april 1974.
it is still the-first-workers'-day-demonstration.
it is used as an-opportunity for workers and  workers'-groups to voice workers and  workers'-groups discontent over working-conditions in demonstrations across portugal, the largest being held in lisbon.
it is an-official-public-holiday.
romania ===
in romania, 1-may, known as the-international-labour-day (romanian:
ziua internațională a-muncii),
the-international-workers'-day (ziua internațională a-oamenilor-muncii), or simply 1/ first of may (1/întâi-mai),  is an-official-public-holiday.
during the-communist-regime, like in all-former-eastern-bloc-countries, the-day was marked by large-state-organized-parades in most-towns and cities.
after the-romanian-revolution of 1989, 1 may continues to be an-official-public-holiday, but without any-state-organized-events or parades.
most-people celebrate together with friends and family, organising picnics and barbecues.
it is also the-first-day of the-year when people, especially those from the-southeastern-part of the-country including the-capital bucharest, go to spend the-day in one of the-romanian-black-sea-resorts.
russia ====
may day, also known in russia as the-day of international-workers-solidarity, the 1st of may
(russian: день международной солидарности-трудящихся-первое-ма́я) was celebrated illegally in russia until the-february-revolution enabled the-first-legal-celebration in 1917.
the following year, after the-bolshevik-seizure of power, the-may-day-celebrations were boycotted by mensheviks, left-socialist-revolutionaries and anarchists.
it became an-important-official-holiday of the-soviet-union, celebrated with elaborate-popular-parade in the-centre of the-major-cities.
the-biggest-celebration was traditionally organized in red-square, where the-general-secretary of the-cpsu and other-party-and-government-leaders stood atop lenin's-mausoleum and waved to the-crowds.
until 1969, the-holiday was marked by military-parades throughout the-rsfsr and the-union-republics.
the-following was the-order of the-march-past:
parade-commander holding the-appointment of commanding-officer of the-moscow-military-district-corps of drums of the-moscow-military-music-collegefrunze-military-academy-v.i.-lenin-military-political-academy-felix-dzerzhinsky-artillery-academy-military
armored-forces-academy
marshal rodion malinovsky military engineering academy military academy of chemical-defense and control yuri gagarin
air-force-academy-prof.-nikolai-zhukovsky-air-force-engineering-academy
delegation of naval-officer-cadets from the-soviet-navy-98th-guards-airborne-division moscow border guards institute of the-border-defence-forces of the-kgb "moscow city council" separate operational purpose division 336th
marine-brigade of the-baltic-fleet-suvorov-military-school-and-nakhimov-naval-schools moscow-military-combined-arms-command-training-school
"supreme-soviet of the-russian-sfsr"-mobile-column
2nd-guards-motor-rifle-division-4th-guards-tank-division-missile-troops and artillery of the-moscow-military-district-1st-aerospace-defense-army-northern-fleet and baltic fleet-coastal-defense,-surface-and-submarine-forces (until 1974)
massed-bands of the-moscow-military-district
(parade-finale)the
first of these-parades were held 1918, when vladimir-lenin presided over a-ceremony at khodynka-field.
notable-parades included the-parade of 1941 (which saw the-presence of a-wehrmacht-delegation led by ernst-august-köstring) and 1963 (where cuban-leader-fidel-castro was a-guest).
the-only-parades on 1-may to be cancelled were the-parades scheduled during the-years of the-second-world-war and the-1965-parade (this was cancelled to make way for the-1965-moscow-victory-day-parade nine days later).
in 1979, ten years after the-last-annual-parade, a-brief-exhibition-drill and military-tattoo of the-forces of the-moscow-garrison took place.
in 1991, which preceded the last year that demonstrations were held in red-square, may-day grew into high-spirited-political-action.
around-50,000-people participated in a-rally in red-square in 1991 after which the-tradition was interrupted for 13-years.
in the-early-post-soviet-period the-holiday turned into massive-political-gatherings of supporters of radically-minded-politicians.
for instance, an-action dubbed as "a-rally of communist-oriented-organisations" was held in red-square in 1992.
the-rally began with performance of the-soviet-union-anthem and raising the-red-flag and ended with appeals from the-leader of opposition-movement working-moscow, viktor-anpilov, "for early-dismissal of president-boris-yeltsin, ousting moscow-mayor-gavriil-popov from power and putting the latter on trial".
since 1992, may-day is officially called "the day of spring and labour", and remains a-major-holiday in present-day-russia.
since 2014 a-national-civil-parade is held on that-day on red-square with similar-events held in major-cities and regional-capitals.
serbia ====
in serbia, 1-may (and also 2 may) is a-day off work and a-day out of school.
it is one of the-major-popular-holidays, and the-only-official-holiday from socialist-times that is still officially celebrated.
people celebrate it all over serbia.
by tradition 1 may is celebrated by countryside-picnics and outdoor-barbecues.
may is marked by warm-weather in serbia.
in belgrade, the capital, most-people go to avala or košutnjak, which are parks located in rakovica and čukarica.
people go around the-country to enjoy nature.
a-major-religious-holiday of djurdjevdan is on 6
so-quite-often-days off work are given to connect these-two-holidays and weekend, creating a-small-spring-break.
1 may is celebrated by most of the-population regardless of political-views.
in slovakia, 1 may is an-official-holiday.
celebrations are held surrounding workers'-day but are also connected with the-commemoration of the-entry of the-slovak-republic into the-european-union (1-may 2004).
slovenia ===
in slovenia, 1-may and 2 may are public-holidays.
there are many-official-events all over slovenia to celebrate workers'-day.
in ljubljana, the-capital, the-main-celebration is held on rožnik-hill in the-city.
on the-night of 30-april, bonfires are traditionally burned.
spain ====
the-first-día-del-trabajador was celebrated in 1889 but only became a-public-holiday with the-beginning of the-spanish-second-republic in 1931.
it was banned afterwards by the-franco-regime in 1937.
the-year after the-year was decreed that the-"fiesta-de-la-exaltacion-del-trabajo," or labor-festival, be held on 18-july, the anniversary of the-francoist-military-coup, instead.
after the-death of francisco-franco in 1975 and the-move towards democracy, the-first-large-rallies on 1
may began again in 1977.
may was re-introduced as a-public-holiday in 1978.
commonly, peaceful-demonstrations and parades occur in major-and-minor-cities.
sweden ==== 1
may has been an-important-part of swedish-history since the-late-19th-century.
the-day was made a public holiday in 1938 but had been celebrated by the-swedish-social-democratic-party and the-left since 1890.
the-first-may-day-celebration gathered more-than-50,000-people in central-stockholm.
more-than-50,000-people in central-stockholm went to hear speeches by the-leading-figures in the-swedish-labour-movement such as hjalmar-branting (later-prime-minister), august-palm and hinke-bergegren.
during world-war
i the-demonstrations mainly had a-peace-message and the-liberal-party
also joined the-demonstrations.
the-eight-hour-working-day and women's-suffrage were the-principal-themes during the-troubled-times after world-war-i. recognizing the-central-contributions of workers and international-worker-solidarity in swedish-social,-economic,-political-and-cultural-development, may-day-demonstrations are an-important-part of swedish-politics and culture for social-democrats, left parties, and unions.
in stockholm the--social-democratic-party always marches towards norra-bantorget, the-historical,-physical-centre of the-swedish-labour-movement, where the-swedish-labour-movement hold speeches in front of the-headquarters of the-swedish-trade-union-confederation, while the smaller the--social-democratic-party marches in larger-numbers towards kungsträdgården.
since 1967, the--social-democratic-party and the--social-democratic-party youth wing, revolutionary-communist-youth, have held the-communist-party and its-youth-wing, revolutionary-communist-youth own may-day-march, known as röd-front ('red-front').
in 2016, röd-front-marches were held at 33-locations across the-country.
the-largest-röd-front-marches are usually held in the-industrial-and-financial-port-town of gothenburg, sweden's-second-largest-city and one of the-party's-strongholds.
switzerland
in switzerland, the-status of 1-may differs depending on the-canton and sometimes on the-municipality.
labour-day is known as tag-der-arbeit in german-speaking-cantons, as fête-du-travail in the-french-speaking-cantons, and as festa del lavoro in the-italian-speaking-canton of ticino.
in the-cantons of basel-landschaft, basel-stadt, jura, neuchâtel, and zürich, labour-day is an-official-public-holiday equal to sundays, based on federal-law
(bundesgesetz-über die arbeit in industrie, gewerbe-und-handel, article 20a).
in the-cantons of schaffhausen, thurgau, and ticino, labour-day is an-official-"day off" (ruhetag).
this is equal in practice to an-official-public-holiday, but is not based on federal-law and cantonal-regulations may differ in details.
in the-canton of solothurn it is an-official-half-day-holiday (starting at 12-noon).
in the-canton of fribourg, public-servants get the-afternoon off, many-companies follow this-practice.
in the-canton of aargau it is not an-official-holiday, but most-employees get the-afternoon off.
in the-municipalities of hildisrieden and schüpfheim (both in the-canton of lucerne) as well as in muotathal (canton of schwyz), 1 may is an-official-public-holiday, but as commemoration-day of the-local-patron saint, not as labour-day.
in the-other-parts of the-cantons of lucerne and schwyz, 1 may is a-regular-work-day.
in all-other-cantons, 1 may is a-regular-work-day.
the-largest-labour-day-celebrations in switzerland are held in the-city of zürich.
each year, zürich's-1-may-committee, together with the swiss federation of trade unions, organizes a-festival and 1 may rally.
it is the-largest-rally held on a-regular-basis in switzerland.
turkey ====
may is an-official-holiday celebrated in turkey.
may was a-holiday until 1981 when may was cancelled after the 1980 coup d'état.
in 2010, the-turkish-government restored a-holiday after some-casualties and demonstrations.
taksim-square is the-centre of the-celebrations due to the taksim-square massacre.
workers'-day was first celebrated in 1912 in i̇stanbul and in 1899 in i̇zmir.
after the-establishment of the-turkish-republic,  workers'-day became an-official-holiday.
in 1924,  workers'-day was forbidden by a-decree and in both 1924 and 1925, demonstrations were intervened by arm-floats.
in 1935, the-national-assembly declared  workers'-day to be a-holiday again.
during the-events leading to the 1980 turkish coup d'etat, a-massacre occurred on 1-may 1977 (taksim-square-massacre), in which unknown-people (agents-provocateurs) opened fire on the-crowd.
the-crowd was the biggest in the-workers'-history with the-number of people approximating 500,000.
in the-next-two-years, provocations and confusion continued and peaked before the 1980 coup d'etat.
the-workers'-day-holiday was cancelled once again.
still, demonstrations continued with small-crowds, and in 1996, three-people were killed by police-bullets, and a-plain-clothes-man who spied in
the-crowd was revealed and lynched by workers.
on the-same-evening, a-video-broadcast on tv showed that two-participants in the-demonstration were lynched by far-right-wing-nationalist-groups and this-lynching occurred in front of police-forces who were watching the-scene with happy-faces.
thus, 1 may 1996 has been remembered by workers'-movements.
in 2007, the-30th-anniversary of the-taksim-square-massacre, leftist-workers'-unions wanted to commemorate the-massacre in taksim-square.
since the-government would not let leftist-workers'-unions into the-square, 580–700-people were stopped and 1-person died under police-control.
after these-events, the-government declared 1-may as "work-and-solidarity-day" but not as a-holiday.
in the-next-year, the-day was declared as a-holiday, but people were still not allowed to gather in taksim-square.
the-year 2008 was remembered with police-violence in istanbul.
police fired tear-gas-grenades among the-crowds, and into hospitals and a-primary-school.
workers pushed forward so that in 2010, 140,000-people gathered in taksim, and in 2011 there were more-than-half-a-million-demonstrators.
after three-years of peaceful-meetings in 2013, meetings in taksim-square were forbidden by the-government.
clashes occurred between police and workers; water-cannon and tear-gas have been widely used.
ukraine ===
it is a-public-holiday in ukraine, inherited from the-soviet-era.
may-day as a-day of workers'-solidarity in kiev began as early as 1894.
until 2018, 2-may was also a-public-holiday (as in the-soviet-era), instead in 2017 western-christianity's-christmas celebrated 25-december became a-new-ukrainian-public-holiday.
the-1-may-international-workers'-day remained a-ukrainian-public-holiday, although it was renamed (also in 2017) from "day of international-solidarity of workers" to "labour-day".
in 2015, may-day-rallies were banned in kyiv and kharkiv.
late-may-2015-laws that ban communist-symbols came into effect in ukraine, thus banning communist-symbols, singing the-soviet-national-hymn or the-internationale.
according to interior-minister-arsen-avakov during the-2016-may-day-rallies in some-major-cities the-number of police-officers far outnumbered the-number of rally-participants.
with in dnipro-193-policemen protecting 25-rally-participants.
united-kingdom ====
a-public-bank-holiday in the-united-kingdom known as may-day was created in 1978 and is held on the-first-monday in may each year.
there are many-traditional-may-day-rites and celebrations, some of which have been held for hundreds of years.
however, it was not until the-late-20th-century that may-day in great-britain became linked to international-workers'-day, and a-public-bank-holiday in the-united-kingdom known as may-day is not officially a-"labour-day".
in recent-years, the-anti-capitalist-movement has organized a-number of large-protests in london, glasgow, edinburgh, and doncaster.
in london, these have resulted in clashes with the-police.
in 2000, clashes with the-police ended with a-branch of mcdonald's being smashed and a-statue of winston-churchill being given a-grass-mohawk-hairstyle.
the-cenotaph was also defaced with graffiti.
in the-last-few-years, demonstrations have been more peaceful, with marches and gatherings, particularly in central-london.
the-conservative-led-coalition-government in march 2011 announced plans to move the-may-day-bank-holiday to october to lengthen the-tourist-season, although as of 2017 nothing had come of this.
a-london-rally on may-day is organized by the london may-day organising committee.
oceania === ====
australia ====
while unofficial-activities and commemorations associated with international-workers-day occur on may-day in australia, labour-day in the-various-states and territories generally falls on other-days.
only in the-northern-territory (where it is called may day)
and queensland is labour-day celebrated on the-first-monday in may, which is a-public-holiday under the-name of "may day".
queensland holds the-biggest-rallies in australia, with the-rally in brisbane averaging 30,000-people.
in australia, one of the-first-may-day-marches occurred in queensland on 1-may 1891.
there are also rallies held in cairns, rockhampton, townsville, barcaldine, ipswich, toowoomba, bundaberg, maryborough, sunshine-coast, gold-coast and other-regional-centres.
new-zealand ====
new-zealand-workers were among the first in the-world to claim the-right for an-eight-hour-working-day when, in 1840, the-carpenter samuel-parnell won an-eight-hour-day in wellington.
labour-day was first celebrated in new-zealand on 28-october 1890.
labour-day falls every year on the-fourth-monday of october.
south-asia === ====
bangladesh ====
in bangladesh, 1-may-day is a-public-holiday and called may day.
a-parade and other-events are held on 1-may-day to commemorate the-occasion.
india ====
in india, labour-day is a-public-holiday held on
1-may.-the-holiday is tied to labour-movements for communist-and-socialist-political-parties.
labour-day is known as "uzhaipalar-dhinam" in tamil and was first celebrated in madras, "kamgar-din" in hindi, "karmikara-dinacharane" in kannada,"karmika-dinotsavam" in telugu, "kamgar-divas" in marathi, "thozhilaali-dinam" in malayalam and "shromik-dibosh" in bengali.
since labour-day is not a-national-holiday, labour-day is observed as public-holiday at state-government's-discretion.
many-parts especially in north-indian-states
it is not a-public-holiday.
the-first-celebration in india was organized in madras (now-chennai) by the-labour-kisan-party of hindustan on 1-may 1923.
this was also the-first-time the-red-flag was used in india.
the-party-leader singaravelu-chettiar made arrangements to celebrate may-day in two-places in 1923.
one-meeting was held at the-beach opposite to the-madras-high-court; the-other-meeting was held at the-beach.
the-hindu-newspaper, published from madras reported,
the-labour-kisan-party has introduced may-day-celebrations in madras.
comrade-singaravelar presided over the-meeting.
a-resolution was passed stating that the-government should declare may-day as a-holiday.
the-labour-kisan-party
the-labour-kisan-party explained the-non-violent-principles of  the-labour-kisan-party.
there was a-request for financial-aid.
it was emphasised that workers of the-world must unite to achieve independence.
may is also celebrated as "maharashtra-day" and "gujarat-day" to mark the-date in 1960, when the-two-western-states attained statehood after the-erstwhile-bombay-state was divided on linguistic-lines.
maharashtra-day is held at shivaji-park in central-mumbai.
schools and offices in maharashtra remain closed on
1-may.-a-similar-parade is held to celebrate gujarat-day in gandhinagar.
vaiko (vai-gopalsamy), general-secretary of marumalarchi-dravida-munnetra-kazhagam, appealed to the-then-prime-minister-v.-p.-singh to declare 1-may as a-national-holiday, to which the-pm heeded and from then on the-pm became a-national-holiday to celebrate international-labour-day.
maldives ====
maldives first observed a-national-holiday in 2011, after a-declaration by president-mohamed-nasheed.
he noted that this-move highlighted the-government's-commitment as well as efforts of private-parties to protect and promote workers'-rights in the-maldives.
nepal ====
1-may-day has been celebrated in nepal since 1963.
1-may-day became a-public-holiday in 2007.
pakistan ====
international-labour-day is observed in pakistan on 1-may to commemorate the-social-and-economic-achievements of workers.
international-labour-day is a-public-and-national-holiday.
many-organized-street-demonstrations take place on labor-day, where workers and labor-unions protest against labor-repression and demand for more-rights, better-wages and benefits.
sri-lanka ====
in sri-lanka, it is observed on 1-may and is a-government and public-holiday.
sri-lanka has held official-may-day-celebrations in major-towns and cities, with the-largest-being in the-capital, colombo.
during celebrations, it is common to witness party-leaders greeting the-crowds.
workers frequently carry banners with political-slogans and many-parties decorate  workers vehicles.
southeast-asia === ====
cambodia ====
in cambodia,  in cambodia is known as international-labour-day and is a-public-holiday.
no-marches for labour-day were permitted in cambodia for several-years after the 2013 cambodian general election and surrounding mass-protetsts.
a-tightly-controlled-march on a-limited-scale was first permitted again in 2019.
indonesia ====
may-day (often referred locally as labour-day) in indonesia was first observed as a-public-holiday from 2014.
every year on the-day, labourers take over the-streets in major-cities across indonesia, voicing labourers demands for better-income & a-supportive-policy by the-ministries.
malaysia ====
malaysia began observing the-holiday in 1972 following an-announcement by the late malaysian deputy prime minister, ismail-abdul-rahman.
myanmar ====
in myanmar, 1 may is known as labour-day (burmese:-အလုပ်သမားနေ့)  and is a-public-holiday.
philippines ===
may is known as labor-day
(filipino:
araw-ng-mga-manggaggawa) and is a-public-holiday in the-philippines.
on this-day, labour-organizations and unions hold protests in major-cities.
on 1-may 1903, during the-american-colonial-period the-unión-obrera-democrática-filipina (filipino-democratic-labor-union) held a-100,000-person-rally in front of the-malacañang-palace demanding workers'-economic-rights and philippine-independence.
ten years later, the-first-official-celebration was held on 1-may 1913 when 36-labour-unions convened for a-congress in manila.
on 1-may 2001, a-mass-demonstration occurred near malacañang-palace known as edsa 3 or 1-may riots.
during the-presidency of gloria-macapagal-arroyo, a-policy was adopted called holiday economics policy that moved holidays to either-a-monday or a-friday to create a-long-weekend of three-days.
in 2002, labor-day was moved to the-monday nearest to
1-may.-labour-groups protested, as
1-may.-labour-groups accused the-arroyo-administration of belittling the-holiday.
by 2008, labor-day was excluded in the-holiday-economics-policy, returning the-commemorations to 1-may, no matter what-day of the-week it falls on.
singapore ====
in singapore,  in singapore is known as labour-day and is a-public-holiday.
thailand ===
in thailand, labour-day is known in english as national labour-day, and is one of 17-official-public-holidays in thailand.
vietnam ====
in vietnam,  vietnam ==== is known as international-labour-day (vietnamese:
ngày-quốc tế
lao-động) and is a-public-holiday.
it was first celebrated in 1913.
west-asia === ====
bahrain ====
in bahrain, 1 may is known as labour-day and is a-public-holiday.
in iran, 1 may is known as the-international-workers'-day.
it is not a-public-holiday but according to article 63 of iranian-labour-law on top of the-official-public-holidays observed in the-islamic-republic of iran, labour-day shall be considered an official holiday for workers.
in iraq, iraq ==== is known as the-international-workers'-day and is a-public-holiday.
israel ====
after historically-varying-popularity of labour-day, 1 may is not an-official-holiday in the-state of israel.
in the-1980s there were several-large-marches in tel-aviv, numbering as much as 350.000 in 1983 and perhaps even more in 1988, but a-steady-decline in numbers led to only-5000-marchers in 2010.
during the-1990s-businesses began to treat it like a-regular-working-day as the-number of may-day-related-activities decreased.
may is largely celebrated by the-former-soviet-jews who immigrated to israel in the 1990s.
jordan ==== 1
may is known as labour-day and is a-public-holiday.
1 may known as the-workers'-day and is a-public-holiday.
left-wing-parties and workers'-unions organize marches on 1 may. ====
palestine ===
may is known as labour-day and is a-public-holiday.
syria ====
1 may is known as labour-day and is a-public-holiday.
see also ==
workers'-memorial-day-pervomaysky (disambiguation)
==-notes == ==
references == ==
further-reading ==
foner, philip-sheldon (1986).
may-day: a-short-history of the-international-workers'-holiday, 1886–1986.
international-publishers.
isbn 978-0-7178-0624-9.
external-links ==
media related to international workers' day at wikimedia-commons  media related to may-day at wikimedia-commons
may-day-archive at the-marxists-internet-archive-photos of may-day in red-square during the-soviet-union-star-wars is a-first-person-rail-shooter designed by mike-hally and released in arcades by atari,-inc. in 1983.
may-day-archive at the-marxists-internet-archive-photos of may-day in red-square during the-soviet-union-star-wars uses 3d-color-vector-graphics to simulate the-assault on the-death-star from the-1977-film-star-wars.
developed during the-golden-age of arcade-games, the-soviet-union-star-wars has been included on lists of the-greatest-video-games of all-time.
the-game features digitized-samples of voices from the-movie, including mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi, james-earl-jones as darth-vader, harrison-ford as han-solo, david-ankrum as wedge-antilles, the-mechanized-beeps of r2-d2, and the-growls of chewbacca.
gameplay ==
assuming the-role of luke-skywalker ("red-five"), the-player pilots an-x-wing-fighter from a-first-person-perspective.
the-controls consist of a-yoke-control with four-buttons — two-trigger-style and two in position to be pressed by the-thumbs — each of which fired a-laser positioned on the-four-leading-edges of the-x-wings.
the-player does not have to destroy every-tie-fighter and gun-turret in order to advance through the-game; instead,  the-player must survive for a-set-length of time, either avoiding or destroying enemies and the-shots they fire.
the-player begins with six-shields, one of which is lost for every-collision with an-enemy or projectile.
if  the-player loses all-shields and is hit again, the-game ends.
each-wave of the-game consists of three-attack-phases, culminating in the-destruction of the-death-star.
phase 1 ===
in the-first-phase, the-imperial-march or another-part of john-williams'-star-wars-score is briefly played electronically and the-player engages in a-dogfight with darth-vader and enemy-tie-fighters in outer-space near the-death-star.
after the-tie-fighter-waves, when flying towards the-death-star, the-yellow-grid-lines on the-death-star spell out either "may the-force be with you" on odd-numbered-waves or names of some of the-developers on even-numbered-waves.
phase 2 ===
in the-second-phase, the-player must fly across the-surface of the-death-star to reach the-player equatorial trench.
this-section is omitted during the-first-wave of the-game.
during the-second-wave the-player is attacked by artillery-bunkers, while in the-third-and-subsequent-waves laser turrets on towers rise to confront the-player.
the-player is awarded a-bonus for destroying every-turret.
phase 3 ===
in the-third-phase, the-player must navigate the-trench until finally firing a-proton-torpedo for a-direct-hit on the-exhaust-port-target.
if the-player is successful, the-death-star explodes and the-player is awarded a-bonus-shield, to a-maximum of six (can be set internally for a-maximum of eight).
should the-player fail to hit the-exhaust-port, a-shield is lost and the-player must attempt the-trench again.
if the-player manages to destroy the-death-star without firing at anything but the-exhaust-port, a-bonus is awarded for "using the-force."
the-game then resets to the-first-phase.
each-successive-wave greatly increases the-difficulty; tie-fighters shoot more often, artillery-bunkers and laser-towers appear in the-first-phase, and obstacles appear in the-trench during the-third.
unlike the-movie, where the-units shoot beams similar to lasers, the-enemy-units in this-game shoot-projectiles resembling fireballs, which give the-player a-chance of destroying the-shots.
development ==
development on the-game started in 1981 under the-title "warp-speed" and was initially headed up by ed-rotberg (who also worked on the-vector-based-battlezone).
ed-rotberg (who also worked on the-vector-based-battlezone) left atari in october 1981, after which atari signed a-licensing-agreement with lucasfilm and finished the-game.
star-wars was converted first by parker-brothers in 1983 and 1984 to atari, atari 5200, the atari 8-bit family, colecovision, and commodore 64.
the-colecovision-version was programmed by wendell-brown.
the-same-game was converted again, in 1987 and 1988, for the-amiga, atari-st, amstrad-cpc, zx-spectrum, acorn-electron, bbc-micro and enterprise 64; the-same-game was also converted again for the atari 8-bits and the-commodore 64.
all-conversions were developed by uk-based-vektor-grafix (the-atari-8-bit-version by zeppelin-games being an-exception) and were published in europe by domark.
that same year broderbund acquired the-rights to develop star-wars-games from lucasfilm.
broderbund published the-apple-ii, macintosh, commodore 64, and ms-dos-versions of the-arcade-game in north-america in 1988, in addition to republishing the-atari-st-and-amiga-versions in 1989.
the amiga and atari-st allow mouse-control and include digitized-sound-effects.
the-macintosh-version contains sampled-speech from the-films, but has no in-game music other than a-monophonic-theme during the-"attract"-mode.
star-wars also appears in the-gamecube-game star-wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike as a-bonus-minigame that can be unlocked after completing a-certain-level or entering a-cheat-code.
in the-united-states and some-european-countries, anyone who pre-ordered the-gamecube-game-star-wars-rogue-squadron-iii received a-special-copy of the-game in which star-wars is immediately unlocked on startup.
==-reception ==
the-game was one of the-top-selling-games of 1983, as atari produced 12,695-total-units.
in japan, game-machine listed star-wars on their-november-1,-1983-issue as being the-most-successful-upright-arcade-unit of the-month.
praised the-atari-st-version of star-wars, calling the-atari-st-version of star-wars "amazing, smoothly animated".
the-ms-dos, amiga, atari st, and commodore 64 versions by broderbund-software were reviewed in 1989 in dragon #145 by hartley, patricia, and kirk-lesser in "the role of computers" column.
the-reviewers gave the-game 3 out-of-5-stars.
macworld praised the-macintosh-version's-gameplay, stating that macworld has "fast-paced-action" and is "extremely challenging in higher-levels".
the-magazine also praised the-sound-effects and 3d-graphics, stating that the latter "enhance the-game's-action and excitement".
macworld criticized the-master-disk-based-copy-protection, and the-game only having three-playable-scenarios with "limited"-replay-value.
in 1996, next-generation listed the-arcade-version as number 58 on next-generation "top 100 games of all-time".
citing "awesome-vector-graphics, multiple-triggers, a-deluxe-cabinet with powerful-speakers in the-back, [and]-digitized-voices", they ventured that it was "probably-the-best-licensed-game ever.
in 1999, next-generation listed star-wars as number 24 on their-"top-50-games of all-time", commenting that, "besides giving you the-opportunity to reenact what many of us consider to be the-greatest-cinematic-experience of our-youth, star-wars delivered fast-shooting-gameplay with all-the-subtleties, and the-combination of tight-control-and-vector-graphics make it equally fun today.
in 2001 it was voted one of the-top-100-arcade-games of all-time by the-members of killer-list of videogames.
star-wars-arcade-machines can be converted into the empire strikes back via a-conversion-kit.
as mentioned above, a-complete-emulation of star-wars, along with the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi is included as bonus-content for star-wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike.
in october 2019, tastemakers-llc's-arcade1up-division released a-3/4-scale-recreation of the-original-atari-arcade-cabinet featuring emulated-versions of the-coin-op-star-wars-arcade, the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi-games.
high-scores ===
in 1984 robert-mruczek scored 300-million-points in 49-hours of gameplay (the world record for an-individual) and in 2005, brandon-erickson set a-world-endurance-record of 54-hours on a-single-credit (with a-score of 283 million).
in june 1985 flavio-tozzi, dave-roberts and mike-ohren played as a-team in turns for five-days, two-hours and 26-minutes on a-single-credit to attain the-world-record-score of 1,000,000,012-points.
it was verified in the-september-1985-edition of the-computer-and-video-games.
their-efforts raised money for a-local-charity.
the-score-counter of this-game "turns over" at 100-million-points.
it was decided to put the-machines on a harder setting for the-annual-twin-galaxies-international-scoreboard/guinness-book-masters-tournament: initial-shields and no-bonus-shields.
in the-1986-tournament, david-palmer scored 31,660,614-points in about-7-hours, a-score which was published in the-guinness-book of world-records and remains the-world-record to this-day.
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars at the-killer-list of videogames
star-wars at the-arcade-history-database
star-wars at mobygames
the-following is a-list of episodes for the-british-television-programme, geordie-shore that first aired on mtv on 24-may 2011.
series-overview == ==
episodes == ===
series 1 (2011) === ===
magaluf-specials ===
===-series 2 (2012) === ===
series 3 (2012) === ===
series 4 (2012) ===
===-series 5 (2013) === ===
series 6 (2013) === ===
series 7 (2013) ===
===-series 8 (2014) === ===
series 9 (2014) === ===
series 10 (2015) ===
===-series 11 (2015) === ===
series 12 (2016) === ===
big-birthday-battle (2016) ===
===-series 13 (2016) === ===
series 14 (2017) === ===
series 15 (2017) === ===
series 16 (2018) ===
===-series 17 (2018) === ===
series 18 (2018) === ===
series 19 (2019) === ===
series 20 (2019) === ===
series 21 (2020) ===
==-specials == ==
references ==
the-original-cast-members of running-man are yoo-jae-suk, gary, haha, ji-suk-jin, kim-jong-kook, lee-kwang-soo, and song-joong-ki.
song-ji-hyo was originally a-guest for the second (episode 2-3) and third-landmark (episode 4-5).
song-ji-hyo officially joined the-program in the-fourth-landmark (episode 6) but was unable to attend until the-fifth-landmark (episode 7).
in april 2011, song-joong-ki recorded song-joong-ki
last-episode (episode 41) in may, and has left the-program to focus on song-joong-ki-acting-career but returned on episode 66 as a-guest after leaving for almost-half-a-year, and later made cameo-appearances in several-episodes.
song-ji-hyo was initially a-guest for episode 13 and episode 14, but later officially joined the-program, starting episode 18.
however,  song-ji-hyo has left the-crew since episode 26 due to schedule conflicts with after school, the-k-pop-group  song-ji-hyo joined.
she later makes a-comeback as a-guest in episode 292, after 5-years since she last-appearance.
on october 25, 2016, gary announced to be leaving the-show to focus on gary music career after being with running-man for 6-years, but later returned as a-guest, only a week after gary final recording.
on april 3, 2017, it was confirmed through various-media-outlets that running-man is adding actress-jeon
so-min-and-comedian-yang-se-chan.
on 27-april 2021, lee-kwang-soo announced lee-kwang-soo departure, becoming the-third-original-cast-member to leave the-show.
timeline == ==
cast == ===
current-cast === ===
former-cast === ==
relationships ==
current-relationships === ===
former-relationships === ==
references ==
geordie-shore:
big-birthday-battle, a-spin-off-series of geordie-shore, a-british-television-programme based in newcastle upon tyne was confirmed on 6-february 2016 following cast-member-scott's-win on celebrity-big-brother
it was announced that he'd be filming for the-next-series of geordie-shore the next day.
however, on 12-february 2016 it was confirmed that the-cast past and present would be reuniting for a-mini-series to celebrate five-years of the-show.
the-series began airing on 10-may 2016.
it features all of the-current-cast-members and the-return of former-cast-members-daniel-thomas-tuck, james-tindale, jay-gardner, kyle-christie, ricci-guarnaccio and sophie-kasaei.
the-only-past-cast-members that did not return for  the-series were greg-lake, rebecca-walker and vicky-pattison.
the-series is classified as "geordie-shore: big-birthday-battle" and not billed as the-thirteenth-series.
the-series also features a-new-twist with gaz and charlotte going head-to-head as team-captains planning the-best-nights out for team-captains team.
this-series includes a-special-episode airing on the-fifth-birthday, on 24 may 2016 featuring the-geordie's-reactions of previous-episodes.
this-series also includes the-show's-100th-episode, airing on 31-may 2016.
on 1-june 2016
this-series was announced that original-cast-member-charlotte-crosby had quit the-show and that this would be her-final-series.
cast == ===
duration of cast ===
= cast-member is featured in this-episode.
cast-member voluntarily leaves the-house.
cast-member returns to the-house.
cast-member leaves the-series.
cast-member returns to the-series.
cast-member does not feature in this-episode.
cast-member is not officially a-cast-member in this-episode.
episodes == ==
ratings ==
references ==
over-one-hundred-video-games based on the-star-wars-franchise has been released, dating back to some of the-earliest-home-consoles.
some are based directly on films while others rely heavily on the-star-wars-expanded-universe.
star-wars-games have gone through three-significant-development-eras:
early-licensed-games (1979-1993), games developed after the-creation of lucasarts (1993-2013), and games created after the-closure of lucasarts (2014–present), which are currently licensed to electronic-arts, and include an-ea-star-wars-logo.
the-first-star-wars-games were developed by a-variety of companies after star-wars-creator-george-lucas licensed the-rights to star-wars-video-games; several of  early-licensed-games (1979-1993), games developed after the-creation of lucasarts (1993-2013), and games created after the-closure of lucasarts (2014–present), which are currently licensed to electronic-arts, and include an-ea-star-wars-logo were released under the-“lucasfilm-games”-banner.
early-licensed-games, released during the-8-bit-and-16-bit-eras of gaming, barely featured any-kind of narrative, and many were action-titles that either retold the-stories of the-original-trilogy (1977-1983) or focused on a-single-scene of a-film.
later on, star-wars-creator-george-lucas took interest in the-increasing-success of the-video-game-market, and decided to create star-wars-creator-george-lucas own video-game-development-company, lucasarts, so star-wars-creator-george-lucas could have more-creative-control over the-games and his own video-game-development-company, lucasarts narratives.
during this-era, graphics evolved enough for games to be able to tell complex-narratives, leading to games that featured more-advanced-retellings of the-stories of the-films, with voice-overs and cgi-cut-scenes, as well as original-titles with new-narratives that were set in the-same-continuity as the-films.
after the-walt-disney-company's-purchase of lucasfilm in 2012 and the-closure of lucasarts the following year, the-games developed during the-first-two-eras were discarded from the-canon in 2014 and reassigned to the-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-label.
following lucasarts-closure, the-rights to produce star-wars-video-games were reassigned solely to electronic-arts.
games published during this-era are considered canonical to the-franchise, and have featured more-influence from the-lucasfilm-story-group, responsible for managing aspects of star-wars-canon.
the-ea-star-wars-license had been set to expire in 2023, but in 2021, lucasarts announced new-partnerships for others to produce star-wars and other-lucasfilm-games alongside electronic-arts.
although many-hobbyists and independent-game-developers have created freeware-games based on the-star-wars-movie-series and brand, this-page lists only-the-games that have been developed or published by lucasarts, or officially licensed by lucasfilm.
as of 2020, there have been over-90-million-copies of star-wars-games sold.
early-licensed-games (1979-1993) ==
in 1978, apple-computer produced an-unlicensed-star-wars-game on cassette-tape for apple-computer apple ii.
as a-"space-pilot-trainee", the-player destroys tie-fighters using a-first-person-heads-up-display.
the-first-video-game-cartridge bearing the-name star-wars appeared that year on the-rca-studio-ii-clones-sheen-m1200 and mustang-telespiel-computer.
the-first-official-licensed-star-wars-electronic-game was kenner's-1979-table-top-star-wars-electronic-battle-command.
the-first-official-licensed-star-wars-electronic-game had three-levels of play (basic, intermediate, and advanced).
players took turns examining star-systems with the-aim of avoiding black-holes, locating enemies, and searching for magna, "the-force-giving-star".
the-first-official-licensed-star-wars-electronic-game was billed as "the-most-exciting-computer-game you will ever play".
the-original-trilogy ===
licensed-releases for the atari 2600  began with the empire strikes back (1982) in which the-player piloted a-snowspeeder during the-battle of hoth, destroying at-at walkers.
several-other-games appeared, such as return of the-jedi: death-star-battle (1983), where the-player controlled the-millennium-falcon in a-mission to destroy the-second-death-star, and jedi-arena (1983), the-first-game to attempt to simulate a-lightsaber-battle (in this-case, clearly inspired by the-star-wars-scene, where luke-skywalker trains with a-seeker).
in 1983, the-star-wars-arcade-game was released by atari based on the-1977-film.
in this-game (featuring color-vector-graphics and the-first-ever-digitized-speech from a-film)
the-player enters the-seat of luke's-red-five-x-wing-fighter, battles-waves of tie-fighters led by darth-vader, weaves through towers across the-surface of the-death-star, and plummets through the-battle-station's-trench in an-attempt to destroy the-battle-station's-trench.
the-sequel for the-game, the-empire strikes back, used the-same-technology to re-create scenes from the-second-film, including battles with at-at walkers and an-asteroid-field.
due to the-video-game-crash of 1983, which temporarily killed the-home-console-market, no-further-games based on the-franchise were released until 1987 when uk-software-publisher-domark released several-8-bit-versions of the-star-wars-vector-arcade-game, followed by similar-conversions in 1988 of the-empire-strikes-back-machine.
in 1987, namco developed a-star-wars-game for the-nintendo-family-computer (famicom) for the-home-console-market exclusively, based on the-1977-film, but with several-liberties taken with the-home-console-market storyline.
in 1991, the-platformer-star-wars was released for the-nintendo-entertainment-system (the-famicom's-western-counterpart), sega-master-system, game-boy and game-gear, and one-year-later,-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back covered the-plotline of the-fifth-episode of the-saga.
also in 1992, super-star-wars was released for the-snes, followed by the-remaining-games in the-trilogy:
super-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1993) and super-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1994), the latter also receiving conversions for the-game-boy and game-gear in 1995.
the-following is a-list of star-wars-games that are based on the-feature-films, developed during this-development-era: ====
episode iv:
a-new-hope ====
star-wars (1983–88) -
arcade re-released for: atari 2600, atari 5200, commodore 64, atari 8-bit family, colecovision, bbc-micro, zx-spectrum, acorn-electron, amstrad-cpc, atari st, apple-ii, dos, macintosh, amiga.
death-star-interceptor (1984/85, system-3-software-ltd) --commodore 64, zx-spectrum-star-wars (1987) -
famicom-star-wars:
attack on the-death-star (1991) --pc-9801, x68000
star-wars (1991–93) --nes, game-boy, master-system, game gear super star-wars (1992, the-first-game in the super star-wars trilogy)
- snes re-released for: wii-virtual-console, playstation 4, playstation vita star wars arcade (1993) - arcade re-released for: 32x
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back ====
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1982)
--atari 2600
,-intellivision-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1985/88)
re-released for: bbc-micro, commodore 64, zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc, amiga, atari.
star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1992)
--nes, game-boy-super-star-wars:
the-empire strikes back (1993 , the second game in the-super-star-wars-trilogy) --snes re-released for:-wii-virtual-console
episode-vi:
return of the-jedi ====
star-wars:
return of the-jedi –-death-star-battle (1983/84) -
atari 2600, atari 8-bit family, atari 5200, zx-spectrum-star-wars:
return of the-jedi – (1984/88) -
arcade,-bbc-micro, commodore 64, zx-spectrum, amstrad-cpc, amiga, atari-st,
gamecube-super-star-wars:
return of the-jedi (1994, the-third-game in the-super-star-wars-trilogy) --snes,
game-gear re-released for: wii-virtual-console canceled:
star-wars:
return of the-jedi – ewok-adventure---atari 2600
(unreleased) ===
stand-alone-titles ===
====-1980s ====
star-wars: jedi-arena (1983) -
atari 2600 re-released for: mobile (2005)
star-wars: droids (1988) --amstrad-cpc, zx-spectrum – based on the star-wars: droids series ==
lucasarts and modern-self-published-games (1993-2013) ==
in the-early-1980s george-lucas decided to invest in videogames.
so through lucasfilm, lucas started lucas own video game company, which lucas named lucasarts.
however, since lucas had already licensed the-rights to develop star-wars-games, lucasfilm instead developed original-adventure-games and world-war-ii-flight-combat-games.
lucasarts regained the-rights to develop star-wars-games in 1993, at that-point lucasarts put lucasarts previous-experience in flight-simulators to use, and released a-star-wars: x-wing, the-first-self-published-star-wars-video-game and the-first-space-flight-simulation based on the-franchise.
the-prequel trilogy ===
as the-phantom-menace-release approached, dozens of licensed-episode
titles appeared, even-educational-titles, the-market was flooded with several-games, most of titles appeared, even-educational-titles of questionable-quality.
however at the-same-time, titles based on the-expanded-universe flourished with critical-acclaim, such as the-expansion to jedi-knight, star wars jedi-knight: mysteries of the-sith and the-first-game in the-rogue-squadron-series.
the-phantom-menace ====
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) --windows, playstation
star-wars:
episode i (1999) -
pinball-star-wars-episode
i: racer (1999)
– windows, mac, dreamcast, nintendo 64, game-boy-color re-released for: nintendo switch (2020), playstation 4 (2020)
star-wars: racer-arcade (2000) –
arcade-star-wars
jedi-power-battles (2000/01) - playstation, dreamcast, game-boy-advance-star-wars
i: battle for naboo (2000/01) --nintendo 64, windows
obi-wan's-adventures (2000) -
game-boy-color
star-wars: starfighter (2001) –
windows, playstation 2, xbox, arcade star wars:
starfighter-special-edition (2001)
xbox-star-wars: starfighter (2003)
arcade-star-wars: obi-wan (2001) -
xboxafter the-release of episode-i in theaters in 1999, games from the-prequel-trilogy were released for most-major-platforms.
the-first-releases were video-game-adaptation (action-adventure) and
star-wars-episode
i: racer, based on the-podracing-sequence in movie.
others, including battle for naboo and jedi power battles, were released, but with little-success.
the-first-strategic-game in the-star-wars expanded universe was titled star wars: rebellion and broke new-ground in that-star-wars:
rebellion incorporated ships and planets not found in the-original-canon, such as the-rebel-assault-frigate and the-bulwark-cruiser.
but for all-its-ground-breaking-new-looks, its was not as successful as would have been hoped.
the-second-strategic-title, star-wars:
force-commander was also released, but failed to keep up with other-rts-games, since it was more focused on battling (with no-resource-gathering) and used a-primitive-3d-engine.
about a decade later, resource-gathering lost popularity in favor of faster-paced-combat-centric-rts-games.
attack of the-clones ====
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2002)
(action)-playstation 2, gamecube,
xbox-star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002) --game-boy-advance-star-wars: the-new-droid-army (
2002) - game boy advancein 2002, attack of the-clones premiered in theaters, and another-wave of star-wars based-games, including the-clone-wars, star-wars racer revenge, and bounty-hunter were released, this time focusing on events and characters from attack of the-clones such as bounty-hunter-jango-fett and the-clone-wars.
star-wars:
jedi-starfighter was released, allowing the-player to be a-jedi-master flying a-jedi-starfighter.
a third rts game with a-much-more-conventional-approach to the-genre's-norms and using the-age of kings-engine, star wars:
galactic-battlegrounds, offered a-better-alternative to those seeking strategy in the-star-wars-universe.
revenge of the-sith ====
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005) --playstation 2,  xbox-handheld and mobile: nintendo-ds, game-boy-advance, mobileadjoining the-release of revenge of the-sith, a-video-game-adaptation (action) was also released close to the-premiere, with various-degrees of success.
star-wars:
republic-commando was also released in 2005.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-animated-series ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels (2008) - wii-star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance (2008)
--nintendo-ds-star-wars:
the-clone-wars – republic-heroes (2009)
--windows, playstation 2, nintendo-ds, playstation portable, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii clone wars adventures
--windows, mac-(shutdown)
legends-franchises ===
formerly known as star-wars-expanded-universe, this-continuity was renamed into legends in 2014 and all-media based on them, including video-games, ceased to be canon.
the-x-wing-series marked the-start of the-star-wars-games moving away from remaking the-official-films and began to focus more on the-expanded-universe.
other-titles were published or licensed by lucasarts, such as the-software-toolworks's-star-wars-chess  who also used the-first-"multimedia-explosion" to release rebel-assault (1993), which used fmv and photos extensively.
the-1996-nintendo-64-title
star-wars:
shadows of the-empire was part of a-lucasarts-attempt to create a-story between the empire strikes back and return of jedi, putting the-player in control of mercenary-dash-rendar.
shadows of the-empire featured fan-favorite-parts from the-super-star-wars-line, such as another-reenactment of the-battle of hoth, piloting a-snowspeeder and tying a-cable around at-ats-legs.
after the-original-trilogy was re-released as the-"special-editions" in 1997, lucasarts published other-titles, including star-wars: yoda-stories and star-wars monopoly, as well as a star-wars-themed fighting game, star-wars: masters of teräs-käsi.
x-wing ====
star-wars: x-wing (1993)---dos, macintosh expansion(s):
imperial-pursuit (1993) and b-wing (1993)compilation: x-wing-(collector's-cd-rom) (1994)
star-wars: tie-fighter (1994) --dos, macintosh expansion(s): defender of the-empire (1994)compilation:
tie-fighter (collector's-cd-rom) (1995)
star-wars: x-wing vs. tie-fighter (1997)
expansions: balance of power-campaigns (1997), and flight-school (1998)
star-wars: x-wing-alliance (1999)
--windowsstar-wars:
x-wing was one of the-best-selling-games of 1993, and established the-beginning of the x-wing computer game series, which garnered numerous-awards and recognition.
star-wars:
x-wing was followed by several-sequels and expansions, such as star-wars: tie-fighter, star-wars: x-wing vs. tie-fighter, and star-wars: x-wing alliance.
rebel-assault ====
star-wars: rebel-assault (1993)-dos, mac, sega-cd, 3do
star-wars: rebel-assault-ii:
the-hidden-empire (1995)-dos, playstation, mac ====
jedi-knight ====
star-wars:
dark-forces (1995)-dos, mac,
playstation-star-wars-jedi-knight:
dark-forces ii (1997)
windows expansion(s) :
star-wars-jedi-knight:
mysteries of the-sith (1998)-windows
star-wars-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast (2002)
windows,-mac,-xbox,-gamecube-star-wars-jedi-knight:
jedi-academy (2003)
windows, mac, xboxthe
first-step towards modern-games was done with 1995's-dark-forces, the-first-star-wars-first-person-shooter-video-game.
a-hybrid-adventure-game-incorporating-puzzles and strategy , a-hybrid-adventure-game-incorporating-puzzles and strategy featured new-gameplay-features and graphical-elements not then common in other-games, made possible by lucasarts'-custom-designed-game-engine, called the jedi.
the-game was well received and well reviewed, the-game put the-player in the-role of kyle-katarn, who would later appear in multiple-games, novels, and comics.
after the special edition original trilogy re-release in 1997, lucasarts published star-wars-jedi-knight: dark-forces ii
,-then-star-wars-jedi-knight: mysteries of the-sith released in 1999.
in-2002,-star-wars-jedi-knight: mysteries of the-sith-sequel
jedi-outcast was released and gave players the-first-chance to experience advanced-lightsaber-duels, and star-wars-jedi-knight:
mysteries of the-sith also detached star-wars-jedi-knight:
mysteries of the-sith from the-usual-idea of movie-tie-ins.
one year later, the-last-game in the-jedi-knight-series, jedi-academy was released.
katarn is a-former-imperial-stormtrooper who joins the-rebellion and ultimately becomes a-jedi, a-plot-arc similar to that of finn in the-2015-film the force awakens.
rogue-squadron ====
star-wars: rogue-squadron (1998)
windows, nintendo 64 star-wars-rogue-squadron-ii: rogue-leader (2001)
gamecube star wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike (2003)
gamecube-note:
the-co-op-campaign of star wars rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike, is composed of all-the-missions of the-single-player-campaign of the-previous-game, rogue-leader (except for two-missions which are not included), and such-missions can only be played in multiplayer, and can not be played in single-player.
additionally as a-bonus, the-game includes the-arcade-games of star-wars, the-empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi.
star-wars-racer ====
i: racer (1999)
windows, mac, dreamcast, nintendo
64-handheld:
game-boy-color-star-wars: racer-arcade (2000)-arcade
star-wars-racer-revenge (2002)
playstation 2 re-released for: playstation store (2015), playstation 4 (2019) racer-related title: star-wars: super-bombad-racing (2001) playstation 2
galactic-battlegrounds ====
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds (2001)
windows, mac expansion(s):
star-wars: galactic-battlegrounds:
clone-campaigns (2002)
windows, mac ====
starfighter ====
star-wars: starfighter (2001)
windows, playstation-2-star-wars:
starfighter-special-edition (2001)
xbox-star-wars: starfighter (2003)
arcade-star-wars: jedi-starfighter (2002)
xbox, playstation 2
knights of the-old-republic ====
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic (
2003)-windows, xbox, mac, ios, android-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords (2004)
windows, xbox,
mac-star-wars:
the-old-republic (2011)
(mmorpg)-windows
expansion(s)
: rise of the-hutt-cartel (2013), galactic-starfighter (2014), galactic-strongholds (2014), shadow of revan (2014), knights of the-fallen-empire (2015), knights of the-eternal-throne (2016) and onslaught (2019).
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-iii-windows, xbox-mobile:
star-wars-knights of the-old-republic (2013)
ios, androidin 2003, knights of the-old-republic, a-bioware-rpg that debuted on the-microsoft-xbox and pc.
knights (also known as kotor among fans) was critically acclaimed, even winning "game of the-year" at the game developers choice awards, (along with many-other-critics) in 2003.
knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords was developed by obsidian-entertainment and released in 2004.
the-sith-lords was praised for  the-sith-lords cerebral writing and moral-ambiguity, similar to the-empire strikes back, but criticized for being derivative of the-first-game and being released in an-incomplete-state.
another-mmorpg titled star-wars:
the-old-republic was developed by bioware, which released globally on december 20, 2011.
pre-orders went up for sale in july 2011 and open-beta-weekends were confirmed for september 2011.
star-wars: battlefront (pandemic-studios) ====
star-wars: battlefront (2004) playstation 2, windows, xbox,
mac-star-wars: battlefront-ii (2005) playstation 2, windows, xbox,
playstation-portable canceled:
star-wars: battlefront-iii (2008) (pc, ps3, xbox 360)handheld:
star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron (2007)
playstation-portable-star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron (2009)
playstation-portable, nintendo ds
star-wars: battlefront-mobile (2005)
star-wars-battlefront:
mobile-squadrons (2009)pandemic-studios'-battlefront consisted of two-games, star-wars: battlefront (2004) and star-wars: battlefront ii in 2005, both-games sharing three-common-console-platforms: the-xbox and playstation 2.
a-third-star-wars:
battlefront-title was planned for 2006 but was cancelled.
two-spin-offs were released,-star-wars-battlefront: renegade-squadron, released in 2007 for the-playstation-portable-and-star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron on november 3, 2009 for the-nintendo-ds and the-playstation-portable.
elite-squadron is the-first-battlefront-game to offer a-transition from space to ground-battles at the-players-choice.
after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm and the-restructuring of the-star-wars-canon, the-battlefront-series was rebooted by ea-dice.
empire at war ====
star-wars: empire at war (2006 )
windows, mac-os-x-expansion(s):
star-wars: empire at war: forces of corruption  (2006
)-windowscompilation:
star-wars: empire at war:
gold-pack (game-and-expansion-package) (2007)
windows ====
the-force unleashed ====
star-wars:
the-force unleashed
(2008)-windows, mac-os, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation 2, playstation portable, wii complete edition re-release with all-dlcs:
star-wars:
the-force-unleashed---ultimate-sith-edition (2009)
windows, mac-os, xbox 360, playstation-3-handheld: nintendo-ds,
(star-wars: the-force-unleashed-mobile)
star-wars:
the-force unleashed ii
(2010)-windows, xbox 360, playstation 3, wii-handheld:
nintendo-ds,-iosstar-wars:
the-force-unleashed, released for the-playstation 3, xbox 360 and wii, uses a-new,-detailed-graphics-engine.
the-wii-version utilizes the-motion-sensing-and-accelerometer-capabilities of the-wii-remote (simulating the-ability to swing a-lightsaber) and the-wii-version nunchuk attachment (used to perform force-powers).
the-wii-version-sequel, star wars: the-force-unleashed-ii, was released in the-united-states on october 26, 2010.
stand-alone-games === ====
1990s ====
star-wars: shadows of the-empire (1996) (3rd-person-shooter)
nintendo 64, windows-star-wars: masters of teräs-käsi (1997)
(fighting)
playstation-star-wars: yoda-stories (1997)
(adventure)-windows
(1997) game-boy-color-star-wars: rebellion (star wars: supremacy---uk) (1998) (real-time-strategy)
windows-star-wars-trilogy-arcade (1998) (rail-shooter)
arcade-star-wars-millennium-falcon-cd-rom-playset (1998)
(rail-shooter-adventure)-windows ====
2000s ====
star-wars:
force-commander (2000) (real-time-strategy)
windows-star-wars: demolition (2000) (vehicular-combat)-playstation,-dreamcast-star-wars:
bounty-hunter (2002)
(third-person-action)
gamecube, playstation 2, xbox-star-wars: republic-commando (2005)
(first-person-shooter)
xbox, windows
star-wars: republic-commando:
order 66 (2005
)-compilation:
star-wars: the best of pc (2006)
(compilation)-windows ==== 2010s ====
star-wars-battle-pod (2014) (rail-shooter)
arcade ====
stand-alone-handheld-and-mobile-games ====
the-following is a-list of star-wars-titles that are handheld-and-mobile-games.
additional-handheld-and-mobile-games are listed above.
unless otherwise mentioned, these-games are also released for mobile-phones.
star-wars: flight of the-falcon (2003) (action/space-simulation)
game-boy-advance-star-wars-trilogy:
apprentice of the-force (2004)
game-boy-advance-star-wars:
battle for the-republic (2005)
star-wars: grievous-getaway (2005)
star-wars-imperial-ace-3d-star-wars:
the-battle above coruscant (2005)
star-wars: lightsaber-combat (2005)
star-wars-trivia (2005)
star-wars:
ask yoda (2005)
star-wars: puzzle-blaster (2005)
star-wars: lethal-alliance (2006)
(action-adventure)
playstation-portable, nintendo-ds – set between episodes-iii & iv-star-wars cantina (2010)
star-wars: trench-run (2009) - ios, unity star-wars battle of hoth (2010)
star-wars-arcade: falcon-gunner (2010)
star-wars: imperial-academy (2010)
star-wars:
force-collection (2013)
star-wars: tiny-death-star (2013)
miscellanea-games ===
the-following-games are more of star-wars-themed, rather than actually influencing the-franchise's-fictional-plot, the-following-games are classified together because of sharing the-same-genre, rather than officially being part of the-same-series.
excluded are the-games listed above.
jakks-pacific-plug
it in & play tv-games ====
star-wars: lightsaber-battle-game (2005)
handheld-tv-game
star-wars: revenge of the-sith (2005) - jakks-pacific-tv-game
star-wars gamekey (expansion)
star-wars:
original-trilogy (2007)
jakks-pacific-tv-game
star-wars: republic-squadron (2009)
jakks-pacific-tv-game ====
kinect-motion-sensor ====
kinect-star-wars (2012)
(kinect)-xbox 360 ====
educational ====
developed by lucas-learning:
star-wars:
yoda's-challenge-star-wars:
the-gungan-frontier-star-wars: droid works (1999)
windows, mac-star-wars:
pit-droids-windows,
ios-star-wars-math:
jabba's-game-galaxy (developed by argonaut-games)
star-wars: jarjar's journey adventure book star-wars:
anakin's-speedway-star-wars: early-learning-activity-centerother-educational:
star-wars:
behind the-magic (1998) (multimedia-encyclopedia)
windows, macintosh
star-wars: jedi-math (2008) (educational)
leapster-star-wars: jedi reading (2008) (educational)
leapster-star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2008)
(platform/educational)
didj-star-wars: jedi-trials (2009)
star-wars-galaxies (mmo/rpg) ====
star-wars-galaxies:
an-empire divided (
2003)-windows
expansion(s)
:-star-wars-galaxies:
jump to lightspeed (2004)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
episode-iii-rage of the-wookiees (2005)
, star wars galaxies: trials of obi-wan (2005), spin-off-:-trading-card-game : star wars galaxies:
trading-card-games---champions of the-force (2008 ,-pc),compilations
:-star-wars-galaxies: starter-kit (2005)
,-star-wars-galaxies:
the-total-experience (2005), and star-wars-galaxies:
the-complete-online-adventures (2006)
the-first-mmorpg, titled star wars galaxies: an empire divided, was also released in 2003 and was subsequently followed in 2004 by its-first-expansion-jump to lightspeed.
two-more-games,-star-wars-galaxies:
episode-iii-rage of the-wookiees (its-second-expansion, which ties in with the-concurrently-released-revenge of the-sith),
and after the-films, more-star-wars-titles continued to be developed and released.
empire at war (an-rts), was released in early 2006.
while released and being active for years, star-wars-galaxies'-servers shut down on december 15, 2011.
notwithstanding the-game's-closure, there are several-private-emulator-projects in various-stages of development that intend to allow users to experience star-wars-galaxies in different-incarnations of the-game's-existence.
however, since the-game can no longer be played the way it was originally meant, the-game is considered to be cancelled.
closure of lucasarts and cancelled stand-alone-games ====
at e3 2012, ea with lucasarts announced star-wars 1313, which focuses more on the-life of a-bounty-hunter as a-bounty-hunter descends to the-level 1313 on coruscant to unravel a-criminal-plot.
the-game focuses more on gunplay-and-bounty-hunter-gameplay rather than the-force-users and lightsabers combat.
the-game was set to release in fall 2013 for xbox 360, playstation 3 and windows.
1313 has subsequently been cancelled by lucasarts following lucasarts purchase by disney.
the following are the-stand-alone-star-wars-videogames that were canceled, the-canceled-titles that were part of a-series are listed along the-canceled-titles that were part of a-series respective series.
star-wars 1313 (2013)
(action-adventure)
star-wars-outpost (2013)
star-wars: first-assault (2013)
(first-person-shooter)
star-wars: attack-squadrons (2014)
star-wars: battle of the-sith-lords (action-adventure)
star-wars: rivals (2018)
(third-person shooter)with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company,
(third-person shooter)with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company was announced that lucasarts'-development-arm would stop making video-games indefinitely.
in addition to this, various-online-browser-games have shut down various-online-browser-games servers, and can no longer be played.
electronic-arts gains the-star-wars-license, and the-restructuring of the-star-wars-canon (2013-2020) ==
after lucasarts was shut down, on may 6, 2013, disney and lucasfilm revealed a-partnership with electronic-arts that granted ea-exclusive-rights to produce star-wars-games for consoles and pc, with disney retaining the-freedom to handle the-games for mobile-platforms, such as smartphones, tablets and browsers.
this-deal was set to expire in 2023.
on april 25, 2014, most of the-previous-licensed-star-wars-video-games, novels, comics produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars were rebranded as star-wars legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise on april 25, 2014.among
the-ea-subsidiaries responsible for creating the-star-wars-games within this-deal, were the-developers-dice, bioware, visceral-games and respawn-entertainment.
after the-canon-restructuring, ea announced ea new games would fall under the-restructured-canon.
as of the-release of jedi: fallen-order, all-ea-produced-star-wars-games are considered canonical, although only the ones with an-actual-"story-mode"-narrative.
reboots === ====
battlefront (ea-dice) ====
star-wars-battlefront (2015) --playstation 4, windows, xbox one
multiplayer only.
star-wars-battlefront-ii
(2017)---playstation 4, windows, xbox-one-singleplayer and multiplayer.
after the-restructuring of the-star-wars-canon, the-battlefront-series formerly developed by pandemic was rebooted by ea-dice.
the-first-game was released in 2015, rushed into the-market to tie-in with to the-release of the force awakens.
as a-result of the-shorter-development-time, developer-ea-dice decided to take a-significant-departure from all-previous-installments of the-franchise and focus
the first game entirely on online-multiplayer, completely axing the-inclusion of a-single-player-campaign or any-sort of narrative; the-move was heavily criticized by fans, including finn-actor-john-boyega.
only-original-trilogy-characters (luke-skywalker, princess-leia,-han-solo, boba-fett, darth-vader and emperor-palpatine) and planets (tatooine, hoth and endor) were playable on launch.
downloadable-content later added the-planets
jakku (from the force awakens), bespin (from the empire strikes back), scarif (from rogue one), in addition to the-death-star-battle-station (from a-new-hope), and heroes-nien-numb, greedo (outer-rim), lando-calrissian, dengar (bespin), chewbacca, bossk (death star), and jyn-erso and director krennic (rogue one: scarif).
the-first-battlefront also received a-playstation-vr-add-on-mission, the-rogue-one-x-wing-vr-mission.
the-first-battlefront is the first in the-series to be considered part of the-star-wars-canon.
the-first-battlefront addresses a-major-criticism of the-previous-game by including a-singleplayer-campaign with a-story-mode-set between the-ending of return of the-jedi and the-beginning of the force awakens, in which the-player controls an-imperial-special-forces-commander named iden versio; additionally, characters from the-films, including luke-skywalker, leia-organa, han-solo, lando-calrissian and kylo-ren are playable.
the-multiplayer-mode features characters from the original, prequel, and sequel trilogies, as well as anthology-films.
future-content was originally going to be distributed in a-"season"-system, though this was changed to monthly-updates.
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order (2019) ===
star-wars-jedi:
fallen-order is a-singleplayer-game developed by respawn-entertainment.
it was released on november 15, 2019 for microsoft-windows, playstation 4 and xbox one.
the-story revolves around a-survivor of order 66, cal kestis, who is on the-run from the-empire-and-empire-inquisitors.
fallen-order takes place between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope.
star-wars: squadrons (2020) ===
star-wars:
squadrons is an-action-video-game developed by motive-studios.
squadrons was revealed on june 15, 2020, and was released on october 2, 2020, for microsoft-windows, playstation 4 and xbox-one, with a-singleplayer-campaign-and-multiplayer-modes, alongside cross-platform-play between all-three-platforms and virtual-reality-support for the-ps4-and-pc-versions.
== cancelled games ===
"project-ragtag" ===
prior to its-closure in 2017, visceral-games was working on an-untitled-game set in the-time between return of the-jedi and the-force awakens.
amy-hennig, former-naughty-dog-writer and director who oversaw the-uncharted-series, joined visceral as creative-lead on the-project codenamed ragtag.
on october 17, 2017, ea announced the-closure of visceral-games.
ea reassigned the-game to  ea ea worldwide studios, led by ea vancouver, and said  ea will revamp the-gameplay, which had been described as a-linear,-story-heavy-title, into "a-broader-experience that allows for more-variety and player-agency".
on 15-january 2019, kotaku's-jason-schreier reported that the-game codenamed "project ragtag" had been canceled according to three-people familiar with goings-on at  ea.
rogue-one-writer-gary-whitta openly criticized electronic-arts for the-cancelation, adding that rogue-one-writer-gary-whitta hoped disney would hand the-star-wars-licence to other-companies.
future ===
following the-massive-player-reception of star-wars-battlefront-ii and the-success of star-wars:-jedi-fallen-order, ea-ceo-andrew-wilson said that they're doubling down on the star-wars games, meaning that a possible revival for the-battlefront-series or more video games that has yet to be reported in development.
other-rumored-console-games ===
the-lower-than-expected-sales and mixed-fan-reception towards electronic-arts'-handling of the-battlefront-sub-franchise has led to rumors of lucasfilm considering to change the-terms of the-license, originally set to expire in 2024.
lucasfilm was rumored to be courting either-ubisoft or activision to either replace ea, or sharing rights to develop star-wars-games with lucasfilm.
mobile-games ===
star-wars: assault-team (2014)
star-wars: commander---android, ios, windows-phone (2014)
star-wars:
galactic-defense---android, ios (2014).
spans both-the-prequel and original-trilogies.
star-wars: galaxy of heroes --android, ios (2015).
as of november 2019, the-game covers the-prequel, original-and-sequel-eras, and the-expanded-universe; most of the-eu-content originates from the-knights of the-old-republic-series of games.
star-wars:
uprising---android, ios (2015, discontinued november 17, 2016)
star-wars: heroes path---ios (2015)
star-wars-rebels:
recon-missions---android, ios, windows-phone (2015)
journeys-series: journeys: the phantom-menace---ios (2014) journeys:
beginnings---ios (2014)
star-wars: force-arena (2017)
- force-arena was a-player versus player-real-time-strategy-mobile-game for ios and android.
ios and android was developed and published by netmarble-games in association with lucasfilm.
force-arena is set in the-rebellion-era of the-star-wars-storyline.
players control customized-squads of characters and vehicles in a-multiplayer-online-battle-arena-(moba)-environment.
the-roster of over-80-available-characters included luke-skywalker, princess-leia, han-solo, darth-vader, palpatine, grand-admiral-thrawn, grand-moff-tarkin, doctor-aphra, ezra-bridger, and jyn-erso.
the-game was shut down in march 2019, following an-announcement on december 19, 2018.
non-exclusivity of star-wars-titles (2021-present) =
in january 2021, lucasfilm revived the lucasfilm games label as the-licensing-brand for all-ip from the lucasfilm production.
this included a-new-indiana-jones-game to be produced by machinegames, as well as a-new-open-world-star-wars-game to be produced by ubisoft and massive-entertainment, the-first-major-non-ea-star-wars-game.
lucasfilm did not speak to the-state of ea's-prior-exclusive-license to develop star-wars-games but affirmed ea would still be making such-games, but stated that  lucasfilm "feel like there's room for others".
in february 2021, a-free-to-play-competitive-arena-combat-game developed by zynga called star wars: hunters was announced.
a-free-to-play-competitive-arena-combat-game developed by zynga called star wars will be released for the-nintendo-switch and on the-apple-and-google-play-appstores.
star-wars-crossover-based-video-game-franchises developed by other-companies ==
in some-cases lucasfilm has allowed other-videogames-franchises to do
in some-cases own star-wars-games, resulting in crossover-hybrid-franchises, that are developed by other-studios.
table-games ===
star-wars-chess (1993)
(chess-engine)-dos, sega-cd, windows
monopoly-star-wars (1996)
windows ===
pinball and virtual-pinball === ====
physical-pinball ====
the-empire strikes back by hankin
(1980)star-wars by data-east (1992)
wars is a-1992-pinball-machine released by data-east.
it is based on the-star-wars-original-trilogy of films.
a-semi-official-update, tweaking and refining the-gameplay-rules was released 20 years later.
star-wars-original-trilogy by sega-pinball (1997)
i by williams (1999)
star-wars by stern-pinball
the-pin by stern-pinball (2019) ====
virtual-pinball ====
zen-studios developed nineteen-virtual-pinball-tables based on the-star-wars-franchise, with none of them being imitations of previously-released-star-wars-physical-pinball-tables.
all of them are released as downloadable-content-add-ons for the-sequels to pinball-fx and zen-pinball.
a-compilation of all-19-tables, titled star wars pinball, is also available on ios, android and nintendo-switch.
the-mobile-versions of star-wars-pinball, are paid apps whose-price unlocks one-particular-table and all other tables are unlocked via in-app purchases, while the-switch-version, released in 2019 as both-a-retail-and-digital-title, includes immediate-access to all-tables, plus additional-features.
an-amazon-luna-port of star-wars-pinball has also been announced as a-launch-title.
star-wars-pinball (2013
)-windows, mac, wii-u, xbox 360, 3ds, psvita, playstation 3, playstation 4, kindle-fire, android, ios
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
star-wars:
the-clone-wars (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
boba-fettstar-wars-pinball:
balance of the-force (2013)
psvita, playstation 3, playstation 4, android, ios-star-wars-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
darth-vader-star-wars-pinball:
starfighter-assaultstar-wars-pinball:
heroes within (2014)
xbox 360, psvita, ps3, ps4, android, ios-star-wars-pinball: masters of the force star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope (2013)
star-wars-pinball:
droids-star-wars-pinball:
han-solostar-wars-pinball:
star-wars-rebels (2015)
star-wars-pinball:
the-force awakens (2016)
star-wars-pinball:
star-wars: resistance star-wars pinball:
might of the-first-orderstar-wars-pinball: rogue one (2017)
star-wars-pinball:
the-last-jedi (2018)
star-wars-pinball:
ahch-to island
star-wars-pinball:
the-last-jedi---survivestar-wars-pinball:
solo-pack (2018)
star-wars-pinball:
star-wars-pinball:
calrissian-chronicles-star-wars-pinball:
battle of mimbana-twentieth-pinball-table, based on the-first-season of the-mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late-october of 2020 and due for a-spring-2021-release.
lego-star-wars ===
lego has licensed videogames based on lego lego star wars toys, as part of lego lego video games franchise.
due to the-technical-limitations of handhelds, the-handheld-versions always result in an-entirely-different-game telling the-same-story as the-console-version, however the-playstation-handheld-versions tend to imitate more closely the-handheld-versions albeit with some-reduced-areas and features.
lego-star-wars: the-video-game (2005):
windows, playstation 2, xbox, gamecube, mac
handheld(s)
:--nintendo-ds, game-boy-advance-lego-star-wars-ii:
the-original-trilogy (2006): windows, playstation 2, xbox, xbox 360, gamecube, mac
handheld(s)
:-nintendo-ds, game-boy-advance,
playstation-portable-lego-star-wars-iii:
the-clone-wars (2011): playstation 3, xbox 360, wii, windows, mac-handheld(s): nintendo-ds, nintendo-3ds, playstation portable
lego-star-wars:
the-force awakens (2016):
windows, playstation 4, playstation 3,  xbox-one, xbox 360, wii-u,  mac-handheld(s): nintendo-3ds, playstation vita lego star wars:
the-skywalker-saga (2020):
windows, playstation 4, xbox-one, nintendo-switchcompilation(s):
lego-star-wars:
the-complete-saga (2007), consisting of lego-star-wars: the-video-game, and lego-star-wars ii:
the-original-trilogy.
windows, playstation 3, xbox 360, wii, mac-handheld(s):
nintendo-ds-mobile: ios, android.
other-lego-mobile-and-web-browser-games ====
lego-star-wars: the-quest for r2-d2 (2009):
unity-lego-star-wars: ace-assault (2011)
lego-star-wars: ace-assault 2 (2012)
lego-star-wars:
battle-orders (2012):
unity-lego-star-wars:
the-yoda-chronicles (2013):
android, ios
lego-star-wars: the-new-yoda-chronicles (2014):
android, ios-lego-star-wars: microfighters (2014):
android, ios-lego-star-wars: microfighters (2014)
angry-birds-star-wars ===
angry-birds made two-star-wars-games.
angry-birds-star-wars (2012)
angry-birds-star-wars-ii (2013)
disney infinity ===
the-third-installment of the-disney-infinity-series included star-wars-characters for the-first-time as playable-characters, alongside characters from other-franchises owned by disney, including characters from the-marvel-and-pixar-films.
disney-infinity 3.0 (2015):
microsoft-windows, playstation 3, playstation 4, xbox 360, xbox one, wii-u, ios,
android ==
cultural-impact == ===
guest-appearances of star-wars-characters in other-videogame-franchises ===
this-category refers to videogames from other-franchises where the-inclusion of star-wars-characters is very minor and restricted only to small-easter-eggs or an-unlockable-character-cameo.
multiple-guest-appearances in a-series ====
tony-hawk's-pro-skater-series: tony-hawk's-pro-skater 3 (2001), activision – skateboarding-game featuring unlockable-darth-maul.
nintendo-gamecube, xbox, playstation 2, pc-tony-hawk's-pro-skater 4 (2002), activision – skateboarding-game featuring unlockable-jango-fett.
nintendo-gamecube, xbox, playstation 2, pc-indiana-jones-series:
indiana-jones and the-staff of kings (2009), lucasarts – action-adventure-game featuring unlockable-han-solo.
wii, playstation 2, nintendo ds, playstation portable lego indiana jones series:
lego-indiana-jones:
the-original-adventures (2008), lucasarts – action-adventure-game featuring unlockable-han-solo and cameos from other-star-wars-characters.
wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation 2, playstation portable, windows
lego-indiana-jones 2:
the-adventure continues (2009), lucasarts---action-adventure-game featuring cameos from star-wars-characters.
wii, nintendo-ds, xbox 360, playstation 3, playstation portable, windows-minecraft (2009)
--various-star-wars-dlc-packs with star-wars-character-skins released.
playstation 4, xbox-one, windows, switch-fortnite (2017) -
a-playable-stormtooper-skin was added to fortnite in 2019.
din-djarin and grogu from the-mandalorian also appear as playable-skins in the-2020-chapter-two,-season-five-event, zero-point.
djarin's-amban-sniper-rifle and djarin-jetpack were included in the-event as usable-items.
the-sims 4: journey to batuu (2020) - the-ninth-game-pack for the-life-simulation-video-game
the-sims 4, is a-collabration with star-wars.
titled the-sims 4: journey to batuu, the-dlc is focused on adventures on the-distant-planet of batuu.
the-dlc was released on pc, mac, xbox-one and playstation 4 on september 8, 2020.
single-appearances ====
night-shift (1990), lucasfilm-games – platform-game featuring action-figures of various-star-wars-characters.
amiga, atari-st, commodore 64, mac, pc, amstrad cpc, zx-spectrum-secret-weapons over normandy (2003), lucasarts –-flight-simulation-game featuring unlockable-x-wing-and-tie-fighter.
xbox, playstation 2
, pc-mercenaries: playground of destruction (2005), lucasarts – features unlockable-character-han-solo.
xbox, playstation 2-soulcalibur-iv (2008), namco-bandai-games – fighting-game.
at release featuring darth-vader exclusively in the-playstation-3-version, with yoda exclusively in the-xbox-360-version, and darth-vader's apprentice galen starkiller marek in both-versions.
months after the-release, darth-vader and yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable-content, each at the-version darth-vader and yoda were absent at release.
each of the-star-wars-characters had each of the-star-wars-characters own ending on the-"story-mode".
however, in late 2016, all of the-dlc in soulcalibur-iv was removed from the-playstation-and-microsoft-stores for unknown-reasons.
it was later revealed to be due to unexpected-licensing-legal-problems caused by disney's-purchase of star-wars.
fan-made-star-wars-games ===
star-wars-mush was an-unlicensed-text-based-role-playing-game active in the-early-1990s.
galaxy in turmoil ===
on january 25, 2016, frontwire-studios began an-attempt to produce an-unofficial-battlefront-installment called galaxy in turmoil.
the-fan made game was in production using unreal-engine 4 and was based on the-cancelled-star-wars: battlefront-iii by free-radical-design.
although early-versions of the-game contained assets from free-radical-design, assets soon became "place-holders" as the-full-game planned to be released using assets and music made from the-ground up.
on june 4, 2016, galaxy in turmoil gained a-distribution-deal through valve and was planned to be released for free on steam which generated a-fair-amount of attention.
on june 22, 2016 lucasfilm requested the-production of galaxy in turmoil in turmoil be halted.
on july 31, 2016, frontwire-studios announced the-cancellation of the-game was due to the-"possibility of galaxy in turmoil taking away attention from electronic-arts'-battlefront-franchise".
proposals of galaxy in turmoil falling under the-paywall of electronic-arts, and ideas of lucasfilm giving frontwire-studios a-star-wars-ip-licence were both rejected due to an-agreement between electronic-arts and lucasfilm.
although frontwire-studios may have fallen within fair-use-laws, legal-conflict was avoided and the-fan made star-wars inspired project was canceled.
there is a-playable-alpha that contains assets from free-radical-design that was released to the-public then removed early on within galaxy in turmoil's-lifetime.
galaxy in turmoil is now planned to be released as a-brand-new-"cyber-punk"-themed-ip without any-star-wars-references, but still with battlefront-iii-inspired-mechanics including space-to-ground battles.
further-reading ==
barr, matthew (16 december 2020).
the-force is strong with this-one (but not that one):
what makes a-successful-star-wars-video-game-adaptation?".
9 (4): 131.
doi:10.3390/arts9040131.
retrieved 21 december 2020.
williams, kyle; radtke, c.-"star-wars: a-video-game-saga".
archived from the original on april 22, 2007.
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars-games at mobygames-ipdb-entry for star-wars.
recent-auction-results for star-wars-star-wars:
the-force-unleashed is an-action-adventure-game developed by lucasarts and part of the-force
unleashed--multimedia-project.
unleashed--multimedia-project was initially developed for the playstation 2, playstation 3, wii, and xbox 360 consoles and on ios,-second-generation-n-gage, nintendo-ds, playstation portable, and java-equipped-mobile-phone-handhelds.
the-game was released in north-america on september 16, 2008, in australia and southeast-asia on september 17, and in europe on september 19.
lucasarts released downloadable-content for the playstation 2, playstation 3, wii, and xbox 360 consoles and on ios,-second-generation-n-gage, nintendo-ds, playstation portable, and java-equipped-mobile-phone-handhelds.
an-ultimate-sith-edition of the-game, containing both new and previously released downloadable-content, was released in november 2009, and later ported to the-macos-and-microsoft-windows.
the-project bridges
the-first-two-star-wars trilogies, acting as an-origin-story for both-the-united-rebel-alliance and the-galactic-civil-war depicted in the-original-trilogy.
the-game introduces a-new-protagonist named "starkiller", a-powerful-force-user trained as darth-vader's-secret-apprentice, who is tasked with hunting down jedi-survivors of the-great-jedi-purge while trying to keep the-great-jedi-purge existence a secret.
however, after the-great-jedi-purge is tasked with planting the-seeds of what would become the-rebel-alliance, which darth vader's plans to take advantage of to overthrow the-emperor, starkiller begins to question the-great-jedi-purge own-morality and to slowly redeem the-great-jedi-purge.
following disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm in 2012, the-game became part of the-non-canonical-star-wars-expanded-universe (also known as star-wars-legends), and an-alternative-origin for the-rebel-alliance and the-galactic-civil-war was given in other-pieces of star-wars-media.
star-wars:
the force unleashed received generally mixed to positive-reviews from critics, with praise for star-wars-story, voice-acting, physics, art and soundtrack, but criticism for star-wars-linear-gameplay and technical-issues.
the-game was a-bestseller in the-united-states and australia, with over-one-million-copies sold star wars debut month.
as of february 2010, the-game had sold over-seven-million-copies, and was the-gamestar wars .
a-sequel, star-wars: the-force-unleashed-ii, was released in october 2010.
gameplay ==
the-force-unleashed is a-third-person-action-game in which the-player's-character's-weapons are the-force and a-lightsaber.
developers treated the-main-character's-lightsaber like another-force-power, and wanted to ensure "something visceral and cool" happened with each-button-push.
the-game has a-combo-system for stringing lightsaber-attacks and for combining lightsaber-attacks with force-powers.
experience-points earned by killing enemies and finding artifacts can be used to increase starkiller's-powers and traits.
the-gameplay is intended to be easy to learn; the-development-team included "horrible"-gamers to help ensure the-game's-accessibility.
players can casually run and gun through  the-game, but  the-game rewards those who take a-stealthy,-more-tactical-approach.
the-game includes enemies that are easy to overcome; game-difficulty arises from presenting these-enemies in large-numbers that can wear down the-player's-character.
additionally, enemies learn from the-player's-character's-attacks; using the-same-attack on different-characters can sometimes lead to the-player's-character doing less-damage.
the-enemies, which number over 50, have various-strengths and weaknesses; developers faced the-difficulty of effectively placing developers throughout the-game's-varied-environments.
version-differences ===
the-force-unleashed has different-features across platforms.
the-playstation-3-and-xbox-360-versions, powered by the-ronin-engine, utilize high-definition-graphics and advanced-dynamic-destruction-effects.
the-playstation 3 and xbox
360-versions, powered by the-ronin-engine also support downloadable-content in the-form of two-expansions that expand upon the-game's-plot.
the-playstation 3 and xbox
360-versions, powered by the-ronin-engine use motion-controls to implement starkiller's-attacks, with the-wii-version using the-wii-remote to execute lightsaber-attacks and the-nunchuk to wield force-powers, while the-nintendo-ds-version utilizes the-touchscreen to execute attacks, where single-actions can be executed by tapping a-certain-region of the-screen (with each-region corresponding to a-particular-action, such as jumping or force pushing), while more-advanced-attacks can be performed by dragging the-stylus across neighboring-regions of the-screen.
the-playstation-2-and-playstation-portable-versions are identical in content to the-wii-version, which is different than the-ps3 and xbox-360-version due to these-three-systems lacking the-playstation-2-and-playstation-portable-versions horsepower.
since these-versions do not support or use downloadable-content, these-versions exclusively intersperse certain-levels with three of the-five-jedi-trials that starkiller completes at the-jedi-temple in coruscant to further hone starkiller abilities, which are all included in a-dlc-pack for the-ps3 and xbox
360-versions.
the-psp-version also exclusively features five-additional-"historical"-bonus-levels that re-enact pivotal-scenes and duels throughout the-star-wars-saga, as well as special-scenarios that can be played with as different-star-wars-characters who have the-same-abilities in the-standard-single-player-mode.
the-psp-version utilizes 3-d-graphics like all-other-major-versions, but lacks voice acting.
the-wii-and-handheld-versions-support-multiplayer.
two-players duel against each other as famous-jedi and sith in the-star-wars-saga in the-wii-version, while the-handheld-versions utilize wireless-multiplayer for a-four-player-battle-mode.
the-game begins shortly after revenge of the-sith, during the-highest-point of the-galactic-empire's-rule.
after imperial-spies track down a-jedi-survivor of the-great-purge named kento marek on the-planet-kashyyyk, darth-vader personally leads the-search for darth-vader while overseeing the-imperial-invasion of the-planet.
during the-first-level, players control vader as vader fights vader way through wookiees to reach marek, eventually finding and defeating vader.
before vader can murder vader, galen grabs galen lightsaber with the-force.
realizing the-boy's-strong-connection to the-force, vader finishes off marek and takes galen with marek, raising marek to become marek apprentice, unbeknownst to the-emperor.
years later, after galen (given the-alias "starkiller" by vader) reaches adulthood and completes his-training, his is sent by his-master to eliminate a-select-group of jedi-survivors across the-galaxy as a-final-test to prepare his for vader's ultimate goal: assassinating the-emperor so that vader and starkiller could rule the-galaxy together.
starkiller travels between missions aboard starkiller personal ship, the-rogue-shadow, developing a-close-relationship with starkiller crew:
lightsaber-training-droid-proxy (who is programmed to regularly attack him) and imperial-pilot-juno-eclipse.
starkiller's-targets include rahm-kota, a-clone-wars-veteran and leader of a-small-militia, who attacks a-tie-fighter-shipyard above nar-shaadda to lure out vader; kazdan-paratus, who became insane after years of isolation on raxus-prime; and shaak-ti, who is hiding out on felucia.
before she dies, shaak-ti warns starkiller that starkiller will eventually be betrayed.
once all-the-jedi have been killed, vader brings starkiller before the-emperor, only to swiftly impale the-emperor and hurl the-emperor through a-window into space to prove the-emperor loyalty to the-emperor master.
unbeknownst to the-emperor, vader has starkiller rescued and resuscitated, believing vader apprentice still has vader uses.
vader sends starkiller to foster a-rebellion among the-empire's-enemies, as part of  vader master plan to destabilize the-empire and create the-proper-conditions to depose the-emperor.
although  vader orders  vader to cut  vader ties to  vader past, starkiller rescues juno, who was arrested and branded a-traitor to the-empire, and escapes with her and proxy.
looking for allies to aid his-mission, starkiller approaches kota on cloud-city, who survived their-previous-encounter, but was blinded and reduced to alcoholism, and rescues his from imperial-forces and an-emperor's-shadow-guard.
the-group then travels to kashyyyk to rescue princess-leia-organa, who was arrested by the-empire, but starkiller temporarily abandons starkiller quest to visit starkiller old home, where starkiller meets starkiller father's spirit and discovers starkiller true-identity  after liberating the-enslaved-wookiees and killing captain-ozzik-sturn, starkiller earns leia's-gratitude, who agrees to join the-rebellion.
afterward, learning leia's-adoptive-father, senator-bail-organa, went missing on felucia, starkiller goes to find starkiller, discovering organa was captured by shaak-ti's-former-apprentice maris-brood, who, like the-other-inhabitants, succumbed to the-dark-side after organa master's death.
after defeating brood and her-pet-bull-rancor, starkiller spares her-life and convinces organa to join the-rebellion.
to convince more-senators to do the same, vader suggests that starkiller attack a-star-destroyer-facility on raxus-prime to show that the-empire is vulnerable.
juno learns starkiller is still working for vader and chastises vader, but agrees to keep silent.
during vader-mission, starkiller is attacked by proxy, who attempts to fulfill starkiller programming by killing vader, but starkiller defeats vader, destroys the-facility, and pulls a-star-destroyer out of the-sky using the-force .
following this, organa meets with fellow-senators mon mothma and garm bel iblis on corellia to formally organize a-rebellion, only for vader to come and arrest fellow-senators and kota.
after overpowering starkiller, vader explains that vader was merely a-tool to lure out and destroy the-empire's-enemies, and that vader plans to overthrow the-emperor never included the-emperor.
surviving thanks to proxy sacrificing the-emperor to distract vader, starkiller vows to rescue the-senators and kota, and uses the-force to ascertain the-senators and kota location: the-death-star.
after sharing a-goodbye-kiss with juno, starkiller battles starkiller way through the-station to reach the-emperor's-throne-room.
vader confronts vader on the-way there, but starkiller defeats vader and faces the-emperor, who tries to goad vader into finishing off vader former master so starkiller can take vader place.
while the-emperor is distracted, kota steals the-emperor's lightsaber and tries to attack the-emperor from behind, but is subdued with force-lightning.
at this-point, the-player must choose between saving kota (light-side) or killing vader (dark-side).
if the-player chooses the-light-side, starkiller defeats the-emperor, but spares the-emperor at kota's-urging.
the-emperor unleashes more-force-lightning, but starkiller absorbs the-emperor, sacrificing the-emperor to allow kota and the-senators escape on the-rogue-shadow.
later, the-emperor and vader look over starkiller's-corpse, concerned that the-emperor has become a-martyr to inspire the-newly-formed-rebel-alliance.
on kashyyyk, the-senators decide to proceed with the-rebellion and leia chooses starkiller's-family-crest as the-senators symbol.
outside, juno talks to kota, who tells her that among starkiller's-dark-thoughts, juno was one-bright-spot that he held onto right until he death.
this is the-canonical-ending of the-game, as confirmed by this-novelization.
if the-player chooses the-dark-side, starkiller finishes off vader and is congratulated by the-emperor, who commands starkiller to kill kota to sever starkiller ties to the-jedi and become a-sith-lord.
instead, starkiller attacks the-emperor, who blocks the-attack and crushes he with the-rogue-shadow, severely injuring starkiller and killing juno, kota, and the-senators.
starkiller later awakens to find he broken body being grafted with armor so that he could continue serving the-emperor, though he assures starkiller that he, like vader, will be replaced once he finds a-new,-more-promising-apprentice.
downloadable-content ===
three-downloadable-content (dlc)-levels for the-game were released.
the-first-one is set during the-events of the-main-story and explores more of starkiller's-background, while the-second-and-third-ones expand upon the-non-canonical-dark-side of the-game, taking place in the-second-and-third-ones own alternate-timeline.
in the-coruscant-level, starkiller, at some-point before traveling to kashyyyk, decides to visit the-abandoned-jedi-temple to learn more about kashyyyk identity and connection to the-force.
after fighting his-way past the-imperial-security-forces, his reaches the-old-council-chambers, where kento-marek's-spirit appears before his and tells kento-marek's that his-needs to pass the-jedi-trials of mind, body, and spirit.
upon doing so, starkiller is faced with a-mysterious-sith-warrior, revealed to be a-dark-reflection of starkiller created by starkiller own-fear.
following starkiller-defeat, starkiller finds a-holocron left by marek, who reveals starkiller as starkiller father and tells starkiller it's not too late to return to the-light-side.
having finally received the-closure starkiller sought, starkiller returns to the-rogue-shadow to resume starkiller current mission.
the-tatooine-and-hoth-levels are set during alternate-depictions of a-new-hope and
the-empire strikes back, respectively, and present starkiller as the-emperor's-trusted-assassin, referred to as "lord starkiller".
in the-tatooine-mission, called a fragile hope, lord-starkiller is tasked with retrieving the death star plans stolen by the-rebel-alliance, which have been tracked to tatooine.
lord-starkiller decides to visit jabba the-hutt, who has knowledge on the-plans'-whereabouts, revealing the-plans'-whereabouts are in the-possession of two-droids at mos-eisley.
however, when starkiller refuses to work for lord starkiller, jabba tries to have lord starkiller be eaten by lord starkiller rancor.
killing the-beast, starkiller escapes from jabba's-palace after massacring his-men, including boba-fett.
at mos-eisley, starkiller kills jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi after a-duel that allows the-droids to board the-millennium-falcon, though starkiller manages to place a-tracking-device on the-millennium-falcon before the-millennium-falcon takes off.
in the-hoth-mission, called wrath of the-empire, starkiller partakes in the-battle of hoth, where the-empire attacks the-weakened-rebel-alliance's-base on hoth to crush it once and for all.
during the-battle, starkiller infiltrates the-base with special-orders to capture luke-skywalker, who began training as a-jedi.
luke-skywalker, who began training as a-jedi eventually finds and defeats skywalker in the-base's-hangar, severing luke-skywalker, who began training as a-jedi right hand.
when the-millennium-falcon tries to take off, starkiller seizes the-millennium-falcon with the-force while goading skywalker to give into the-dark-side to rescue skywalker friends.
skywalker attacks starkiller with force-lightning, causing  skywalker to let go of the-ship and congratulate skywalker for embracing the-dark-side, planning to make  skywalker  skywalker apprentice the same way vader did to  skywalker.
cast and characters ==
sam witwer as galen-marek/starkiller — the-forbidden-child of a-jedi, starkiller was adopted by his-father's-killer, darth-vader, who, aware of his-strong-connection to the-force, raised his to be his-secret-apprentice.
once his-training is complete, starkiller is dispatched by his-master to kill several-prominent-jedi who survived the-great-jedi-purge.
although initially acting as a-villain, starkiller is "really-just-[a]-damaged-kid."
developers decided not to give starkiller a-name in the-game, but the-novelization reveals the-novelization real name as "galen-marek".
although starkiller starts as vader's-apprentice, a-focus of the-game is to allow the-character to evolve into "something more heroic, something greater."
audio-director-david-collins saw a-resemblance between starkiller concept art and audio-director-david-collins friend, witwer; audio-director-david-collins asked for witwer's headshot and an-audition-reel, and a few weeks later witwer sat for a-45-minute-audition.
witwer secured the-role by demonstrating to developers witwer deep understanding of the-character; in portraying starkiller, witwer brought many-new-ideas about the-character and imbued the-character with a-sense of humanity.
developers tried not to make starkiller so evil that players would have difficulty connecting to the-character, aiming to strike a-balance between loyalty to the-character master and the-character growing sense of disillusionment with the-empire.
the-character's-name is an-homage to "anakin-starkiller," the-original-name of the-character that eventually became luke-skywalker.
matt-sloan as darth-vader — a-powerful-dark-lord of the-sith,-high-ranking-enforcer of the-empire, and starkiller's-master, who discovers starkiller as a-child and trains starkiller.
in training starkiller by having starkiller hunt the-few-remaining-jedi-survivors, vader intends to prepare starkiller to overthrow the-emperor, although there are "twists and turns" in this-scheme.
the-events depicted in the force unleashed are pivotal to vader-history and development, depicting starkiller as being largely responsible for the-events leading to the-galactic-civil-war, depicted in the-original-star-wars-trilogy.
nathalie-cox as juno-eclipse — rogue-shadow’s-pilot and starkiller's-love-interest.
eclipse was not originally part of the-game; early-concepts had the-apprentice as an-older-character who develops a-connection with a-young-princess-leia.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas, uncomfortable with this-idea, encouraged the-developers to create a-love-interest.
the-apprentice, who has had limited-interaction with women when the-game begins, does not at first know how to act around a-young-princess-leia.
a-young-princess-leia-introduction early in the-game allows the-relationship with starkiller to develop, and a-young-princess-leia-inclusion helps "recapture that rich-ensemble feel of the-original-star-wars".
according to sean-williams, who wrote the-novelization, the-romantic-storyline is the-key to the-force-unleashed.
the-name "juno-eclipse" was originally proposed as a-name for the-character eventually called "asajj ventress" — it was ultimately rejected as insufficiently villainous.
the-force-unleashed-project lead
haden-blackman brought the-name back for the-mythic-quality of the-name "juno" and the-duality suggested by an-"eclipse."
cox, in addition to strongly resembling the-character's-concept-art, had "integrity and poise" appropriate to juno-eclipse that helped the-actor secure the-role.
cully-fredricksen as general-rahm-kota —
a-jedi-master-and-clone-wars-veteran who provides starkiller with additional-insight into the-force and helps connect him to him jedi-heritage.
developers realized early that starkiller would require insight into the-force from someone other than darth-vader; after rejecting the-idea of this coming from the-spirit of qui-gon-jinn or some-version of darth-plagueis, developers decided to fill this-role with one of starkiller's jedi opponents.
the-character was conceived as a "tough-as-nails" contrast to the-more-traditional-image of a-jedi represented by jinn and obi-wan-kenobi.
senior-concept-artist-amy-beth-christianson drew upon samurai-influences for kota's-appearance.
the-character changed little after being conceived; fredricksen's-own-traits made the-character tougher.
fredricksen was the-first-actor cast for the-project.
adrienne-wilkinson as maris-brood —
a-zabrak-survivor of the-jedi-purge and shaak-ti's-apprentice.
after a-zabrak-survivor of the-jedi-purge and shaak-ti's-apprentice-master's-death at starkiller's-hands, brood falls to the-dark-side and uses felucia's-inhabitants to wage war on the-imperial-forces trying to occupy the-planet.
the-character was originally conceived as a-pirate-captain, and christianson's-early-art included brood's-distinctive-lightsaber-tonfas.
wilkinson brought strength to  wilkinson performance, leading to an-expansion of the-role with more-dialogue.
david-w.-collins as proxy — starkiller's-droid-sidekick, designed to constantly test david-w.-collins as proxy — starkiller's-droid-sidekick lightsaber and force-abilities, as well as deliver important-messages through holographic-projection.
david-w.-collins said proxy has c-3po's-innocence but also is "really dangerous."
the-companion-trade-paperback describes the-conflict between proxy's-primary-programming to kill starkiller-and-starkiller-self-imposed-desire to help starkiller; proxy is eager to please starkiller, but does not know how dangerous it can be or that there is a-conflict between it programming and starkiller's wishes.
trying to avoid having proxy's-dialogue become too reminiscent of either-c-3po or the villainous hk-47 of knights of the-old-republic, developers focused on proxy's-friendly-naïvety.
jimmy-smits as bail-organa —
the-emmy-award-winning-smits voices the-character
the-emmy-award-winning-smits played in the-star-wars prequels: a-galactic-senator from alderaan and princess-leia's-adoptive-father who becomes a-founding-member of the-rebel-alliance.
other-performances include tom-kane as kento-marek and captain-ozzik-sturn, larry-drake as kazdan-paratus, susan-eisenberg as shaak-ti, and catherine-taber as princess-leia-organa.
in addition to voicing starkiller, witwer also provided the-voice of emperor-palpatine.
r2-d2 also makes an-appearance in the-game alongside leia.
the-game's-downloadable-content features david-w.-collins as jabba the-hutt, dee-bradley-baker as boba-fett, rob-rackstraw as obi-wan-kenobi, and lloyd-floyd as luke-skywalker.
development == ===
concept ===
game-planning began in summer 2004.
initially, about-six-developers started with a-"clean-slate" to conceptualize a-new-star-wars-game; the-small-group of engineers, artists, and designers spent more than a year brainstorming ideas for what might make a-good-game.
over-100-initial-concepts were whittled down to 20 to 25 that included making the-game the third entry in the-knights of the-old-republic-series or having the-protagonist be a-wookiee-"superhero", darth-maul, a-bounty-hunter, a-smuggler, a-mercenary, or the-last-member of the-skywalker-family.
the-decision to focus on the-largely-unexplored-period between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope helped energize the-design-team.
consumer-feedback helped the-developers narrow in on seven-concepts, and elements from those seven went into the-force-unleashed's-overall-concept.
production was greatly aided by concept-art, which was intended to visually bridge the-two-star-wars-trilogies, convey the-impression of a "lived-in" universe, show how the-galaxy changes under imperial-rule, and to seem familiar yet new.
an-off-hand-comment about the-force in the-game being powerful enough "to pull a-star-destroyer out of the-sky" inspired an-image by senior-concept-artist-amy-beth-christenson that became an-important-part of the-developers'-idea-pitches and evolved into a-major-moment in the-game.
these-illustrations also inspired the-creation of dozens of simple,-three-dimensional-animations.
eventually, a-one-minute-previsualization-video highlighting the-idea of "kicking someone's-ass with the-force" helped convince the-designers that the-force-unleashed would be "a-great-game";
george-lucas, upon seeing the-one-minute-video, told the-designers to "go make that-game".
once the-concept was solidified, the-development-team grew from ten-to-twenty-people.
the-idea of "reimagining" the-force as "amped up" in the-force unleashed aligned with lucasarts'-overall-goal of harnessing the-power of the-latest-video-game-consoles to "dramatically"-change-gaming, specifically through the-use of simulation-based-gameplay.
in april 2005, after several-months of planning, the-development-team received  george-lucas-encouragement to create a-game centered on darth-vader's-secret-apprentice in the-largely-unexplored-period between revenge of the-sith and a-new-hope,  drawing the-two-trilogies together.
lucasarts spent six-months developing the-story.
lucas spent hours discussing with the-developers the-relationship between darth-vader and emperor-palpatine and provided feedback on what darth-vader would want out of and how darth-vader would motivate an-apprentice.
lucas-licensing reviewed many-game-details to ensure lucas-licensing fit into canon.
focus-group-feedback indicated that, while hunting down jedi at darth-vader's-order would be fun, the-character should be redeemed, in keeping with a-major-star-wars-motif.
although the-game introduces new-characters, developers felt the-presence of characters already-part of star-wars would help anchor the-game within the-official-continuity.
before the-game's-release, lucasfilm claimed lucasfilm would "unveil new-revelations about the-star-wars-galaxy" with a-"redemption"-motif.
the-story progresses through a-combination of scripted-events, in-game cinematics, cutscenes, and dialogue.
technology ===
during pre-production, about-30-people were on the-project-team.
lucasarts spent several-years developing the-tools and technology to create the force unleashed.
prototyping, level-construction, marketing, and public-relations took about a year.
until late 2006, the-production-team was ascertaining "how-many-polygons, lights, [and]-characters" next-generation-platforms supported; a-year of full-production began in early 2007.
a-series of quickly-produced-"play-blast
" videos helped the-developers focus on mechanics, the-user-interface, and finishing moves.
development of the-xbox-360-version came first; playstation-3-development started when the-production-team had enough-development-kits.
making the-game run on both the playstation 3 and xbox 360 was "a-monumental-task".
the-game is based on lucasarts'-proprietary-"ronin"-game-engine but also integrates third-party-technology
:-havok for rigid-body-physics, pixelux-entertainment's-"digital-molecular-matter" (dmm) for dynamically-destructible-objects, and naturalmotion's-euphoria for realistic-non-player-character artificial-intelligence.
lucasarts'-programmers had to overcome technical-hurdles to get
dmm- and-euphoria-coded-components to interact.
developers also had to strike a-balance between realistic-and-entertaining-physics.
lucasarts initially opted not to release a-personal-computer-version of the-force-unleashed, stating that doing the-game well would be too processor-intensive for typical-pcs and that scaling down the-game's procedural physics for the-pc-platform would "fundamentally" change the-force-unleashed's gameplay.
however, lucasarts later announced windows-and-mac-versions of the-game, developed in conjunction with aspyr-media, for release in
fall-2009.lacking-havok,-euphoria,-and-dmm,-krome's-wii-version relies on the company's in-house physics engine.
some-character-animations may be ragdoll while others are preset; in developing the-game, krome tried to blur the-distinction between the two.
the-lighting-system in the-wii-version is more advanced than that in the-ps2-version, which krome also built; ps2 includes more-graphic-details than ps2 psp version.
ilm-collaboration and cast-performance ===
the-force-unleashed is intended to make players think players are "actually, finally, in a-star-wars-movie".
it is the-first-game on which lucasarts and industrial-light & magic (ilm) collaborated since they both relocated to the-letterman-digital-arts-center in san-francisco, california.
this-collaboration allowed the-companies to co-develop tools to make film-quality-effects.
lucasarts worked with ilm's-zeno-tool-framework and helped ilm build lucasarts zed game editor.
lucas said having the-companies working together in the-same-building was "a great
collaboration".
it took senior-manager of voice and audio darragh-o'farrell four-months to cast the force unleashed.
ilm's-face--and-motion-capture-"clonecam"-technology recorded actors'-voice-and-physical-performances.
this led to a-change in lucasarts'-casting-process: for the-first-time, actors needed to match characters'-age and gender.
actors performed actors lines together, rather than in isolation, to better get the-sense of actors characters interacting with each other.
consequently, the-script's-dialogue was reduced while reliance on characters'-expressions — captured through the-clonecam — increased.
clonecam-technology had previously been used in producing the-pirates of the-caribbean-movies.
lucasarts-music-supervisor-jesse-harlin said music === matches the-game's-motif of redemption and goal of bridging the-gap between revenge of the-sith and
a-new-hope
: we had to make sure that the-game's-score started off rooted within the-prequel-trilogy feel of ethnic-percussion and sweeping-themes that spoke to the-nobility and grandeur of the-old-jedi-order.
as the-game progresses, however, the-empire gains more-control, the-jedi are hunted, and the-ordered-control of the-prequels gives way to the-more-romantic-temperament of the-original-trilogy.
the-game's-soundtrack includes material composed by john-williams for the-films in addition to material created specifically for the-force-unleashed.
jesse-harlin composed the-game's-main-theme, while mark-griskey composed the-score.
griskey made use of several-motifs from the-film-scores as well as harlin's-main-theme.
the-90-minute-soundtrack was recorded by the-skywalker-symphony-orchestra and mixed at skywalker-sound in lucas-valley in september and october 2007.
during gameplay, a-proprietary-engine combines "musical-elements according to the-pace, plot, and environment of the-game at any-given-moment", resulting in a-unique-musical-experience.
a-promotional-soundtrack-album was made available online through tracksounds.com in 2008.
expansion ===
two weeks after the-game's-release, lucasarts announced development on two-downloadable-expansion-packs for the-playstation-3-and-xbox-360-versions of the-game.
the-first-expansion added "skins" that allow the-player's-character to appear as star-wars figures other than starkiller, such as obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker, qui-gon-jinn, jango-fett, c-3po, luke-skywalker, darth-maul, darth-sion, mace-windu, plo-koon, kit-fisto and ki-adi-mundi.
the-skins chosen to be part of the-expansion were based in part on fans'-feedback.
the-second-expansion-pack added a-new-mission that expands on starkiller's-background.
although a-moment in the-game's-main-story was considered as a-"jumping-off-point" for the-expansion, lucasarts decided instead to make the-new-mission instantly accessible to players.
the-new-mission's-location — the-jedi-temple on coruscant — appears in the-wii, playstation-2-and-playstation-portable-versions of the-force-unleashed, but was cut during planning from the-ps3 and xbox-360-platforms.
the-tatooine-downloadable-content, released august 27, 2009, is the first of two-expansions that occur in an-"infinities"-storyline, an-alternate-history in which starkiller kills vader and becomes palpatine's-assassin.
the-second-infinities-expansion, which takes place on hoth, was originally only available as part of the-ultimate-sith-edition, which also includes all-previous-downloadable-content.
however, the-hoth-expansion was later made available for download on the-playstation-network and xbox live.
== reception ==-1.738-million-unit-sales of the-force unleashed across all-platforms made it the third best-selling game globally in the-third-quarter of 2008; as of july 2009, it had sold six-million-copies.
the-force-unleashed was both-the-fastest-selling-star-wars-game and lucasarts'-fastest-selling-game.
the-force-unleashed won a writers guild of america award for best-video-game-writing.
playstation 3, xbox 360 and pc ===
the force unleashed received mixed to fairly-positive-reviews.
electronic-gaming-monthly said the-game is "ambitious--yet dissatisfying"; however, gamespot said the-game "gets more right than the-game does wrong".
gamespot said the-pc-port of the-game retained all of the-game's strengths and weaknesses, but that the-pc-port of the-game failed to take advantage of the-pc-platform.
gamespot called the-game's-story "more intimate and more powerful" than the-star-wars-franchise's-prequel-trilogy; x-play identified the-game's-story as one of the-game's-"few-bright-spots" and said the-game's-visuals successfully convey star-wars'-"classic-used-universe" feel.
gamepro and gamespot praised the-game's-art and physics, and gamepro also commended starkiller's-"cool-powers".
ign praised the game's voice acting, particularly-witwer's-performance as starkiller.
the-washington-times identified mark-griskey's-soundtrack as "another-star" of the-game, and tracksounds called it "the most entertaining star wars score since return of the-jedi".
time called the force unleashed the-seventh-best-video-game of 2008.
the-game received gamespot's-2008-award for best-use of a-creative-license and was nominated for best-voice-acting.
gaming-target selected the-game as one of gaming-target "40-games
we'll still be playing from 2008".
conversely, entertainment-weekly called the force unleashed the-second-worst-game of 2008 and
gametrailers called gametrailers the most disappointing game that year; gametrailers was also a-nominee for gamespot's-most-disappointing-game-recognition.
official-xbox-magazine cited the-game's-linear-gameplay and lack of multiplayer as reasons the-game falls short of being "an-all-engrossing-star-wars-experience".
gamestm suggested that allowing players to take a-hack-and-slash-approach means many "will never view the-title's-full-potential".
ign and x-play criticized some-boss-battles and enemies'-behavior; gamepro also faulted "disappointing"-boss-battles and the-game's-"uneven"-combat.
rather than feeling more powerful as the-game progresses, gamepro felt that increases in starkiller's-powers were dampened by increasingly-difficult-enemy-abilities and positions; x-play commented that despite a-good-level-up-system, starkiller-and-starkiller-enemies are "pretty much on even-ground most of the-time".
wired.com, x-play, and gamespot criticized the-game's-third-person-camera and the-sequence that requires the-player to make starkiller pull a-star-destroyer out of the-sky.
wired.com speculated that lucasarts could have recognized the-frustration of the-star-destroyer-sequence and removed the-star-destroyer-sequence, but left the-star-destroyer-sequence in because they hyped the-star-destroyer-sequence before the-game's-release.
wired.com and gamespot further criticized the-load-times and abrupt-gameplay-cinematic-transitions.
gamespot also faulted "loose" targeting and some-visual-and-audio-glitches.
ign, which also identified problems with targeting, speculated that dmm's-processor-intensiveness limited dmm's-processor-intensiveness use throughout the-game, detracting from players'-ability to feel immersed.
gametrailers and ign were disappointed with the-lack of variety within and between levels.
x-play, pointing to "default-text" as the-bonus-objective-description in the-xbox-360-version's-final-mission and other-glitches, said it seems the developers one-day "just stopped working on the-game".
gamespot cited the-port's-lack of visual-options and poor-framerate as evidence the-pc-edition had been rushed.
ign described the-jedi-academy-expansion as "pretty decent".
gamespot said lucasarts seems to have acknowledged some of the-game's-criticisms in developing the-tatooine-expansion, but ign called the--level's-boss fights "a-joke" in light of the-player's-high-force-powers.
ign found the-level-design in the-ultimate-sith-edition's-hoth-scenario uninteresting, and called the-boss fight against luke-skywalker tough but "not nearly as fun" as it could have been.
the-demo was the-fourth-most-played-xbox-live-game during the-week of august 25, trailing grand-theft-auto-iv, halo 3, and call of duty 4: modern-warfare; it was the-ninth-most-played-xbox-live-title throughout all of 2008.
the-week the-week was released, the-force-unleashed was the-sixth-most-played-game on xbox live, and the-week rose to fifth the following week.
in the-week first week on sale in australia, the-ps3 and xbox 360-versions of the-force-unleashed were the-top-and-second-best-sellers, respectively.
in the-united-states, the-playstation-3-and-xbox-360-version sold 325,000-and-610,000-copies, respectively, in september 2008; that month, the-xbox-360-version was the-best-selling-game and the-playstation-3-version was the-fifth-best-selling-game for their-respective-consoles.
other-platforms ===
nintendo-power praised the-story and the-number of lightsaber-combos but criticized the-game's-easiness and hack-and-slash-gameplay.
nintendo-power also praised the-wii-version for nintendo-power story and force-powers, but criticized the-game's-lightsaber-controls and linear-gameplay.
gamespot noticed visual-glitches and problematic-audio-compression that detracted from the-wii-version's-"mature-and-exciting"-story, adding that the-reduced-number of force-manipulable-objects helps mitigate the-targeting-problems experienced on other-platforms.
referring to the-wii-remote-and-nunchuck-controls, gamespot also speculated that the-force-unleashed is "possibly-the-most-waggle-heavy"-wii-game.
zero-punctuation criticized the-wii-version's-graphics and compared lightsaber-combat to "trying to follow an-aerobics-routine with both-your-arms tied to different-windmills".
the-ability to upgrade starkiller's-abilities in the-ps2-version, according to ign, is not as "robust" as it should be, and the-game's-targeting-system is sometimes frustrating.
ign said the-ps2's-real-time-cutscene rendering made starkiller seem emotionless, and that pre-rendered-cutscenes would have been better.
gamespot found the-ds-version's-plot interesting but the-storytelling itself "lackluster".
while the-ds-version is easy, with starkiller killing enemies "like a-hot-knife through butter", gamespot said the-player's-sense of power is not matched by a-sense of freedom.
gamespot called the psp version's camera "unwieldy", but added that smaller-and-less-cluttered-environments make the-targeting-system less frustrating than on other-platforms.
the-ds-version was a-nominee for multiple-wii-specific-awards from ign in the-ds-version 2008 video game awards, including best-story and best-voice-acting.
in the-week of the-ds-version-release, the-ds-version was the-sixth-bestselling-game in australia and was second to wii-fit among games for that-platform.
the-ds-version was the-eighth-bestseller in australia, and both-the-ps2-and-psp-versions were the-top-sellers on the-ps2-and-psp-versions-respective-platforms.
the-ds-version was eighth most sold among ds-games in australia.
in the-united-states,  the-ds-version sold 223,000-copies in september 2008, making  the-ds-version the-ninth-best-selling-game that month.
in the-united-states,  the-ds-version was the-14th-best-selling-game in september 2008, selling over-100,000-copies.
notes == ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars:
the-force unleashed on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-force unleashed at mobygames-star-wars:
the-force unleashed at imdb
the-planets, op.
32, is a-seven-movement-orchestral-suite by the-english-composer gustav-holst, written between 1914 and 1916.
each-movement of the-suite is named after a-planet of the-solar-system and the-solar-system corresponding astrological character as defined by holst.
from its-premiere to the-present-day, the-suite has been enduringly popular, influential, widely performed and frequently recorded.
the-work was not heard in a-complete-public-performance, however, until some years after the-work was completed.
although there were four-performances between september 1918 and october 1920, they were all either private-(the-first-performance, in london) or incomplete (two-others in london and one in birmingham).
the-premiere was at the-queen's-hall on 29-september 1918, conducted by holst's-friend adrian-boult before an-invited-audience of about-250-people.
the-first-complete-public-performance was finally given in london by albert-coates conducting the london symphony orchestra on 15-november 1920.
background ==
the-concept of the-work is astrological rather than astronomical (which is why earth is not included, although sun and moon are also not included while including the-non-traditional-uranus and neptune): each-movement is intended to convey ideas and emotions associated with the-influence of the-planets on the-psyche, not the-roman-deities.
the-idea of the-work was suggested to holst by clifford-bax, who introduced him to astrology when the two were part of a-small-group of english-artists holidaying in majorca in the-spring of 1913; holst became quite-a-devotee of the-subject, and would cast holst friends' horoscopes for fun.
holst also used alan-leo's-book what is a-horoscope?
as a-springboard for his-own-ideas, as well as for the-subtitles (e.g., "the-bringer of...") for the-movements.
on 17-january 1914
holst attended a-performance of arnold-schoenberg's-five-pieces for orchestra, at the-queen's-hall, conducted by schoenberg's-pupil edward-clark.
holst quickly acquired a-copy of the-score, the-only-schoenberg-score  holst ever owned.
this influenced  holst at least to the-degree that the-working-title of  holst own composition was seven-pieces for large-orchestra.
when composing  holst initially scored the-work for four-hands, two-pianos, except for neptune, which was scored for a-single-organ, as  holst believed that the-sound of the-piano was too percussive for a-world as mysterious and distant as neptune.
holst then scored the-suite for a-large-orchestra, in which-form it became enormously popular.
holst's-use of orchestration was very imaginative and colourful, showing the-influence of such-contemporary-composers as igor-stravinsky and arnold-schoenberg, as well as such-late-russian-romantics as nikolai-rimsky-korsakov and alexander-glazunov.
russian-novel-sonorities helped make the-work an immediate success with audiences at home and abroad.
although the-planets remains holst's-most-popular-work, the-composer himself did not count its-novel-sonorities among the-composer himself best-creations and later in life complained that its-novel-sonorities popularity had completely surpassed the-composer himself other-works.
the-composer himself was, however, partial to the-composer himself own-favourite-movement, saturn.
premieres ==
the-orchestral-premiere of the-planets-suite, conducted at holst's-request by adrian-boult, was held at short-notice on 29-september 1918, during the-last-weeks of world-war-i, in the-queen's-hall with the-financial-support of holst's-friend and fellow-composer h.-balfour-gardiner.
it was hastily rehearsed; the-musicians of the-queen's-hall-orchestra first saw the-complicated-music only two hours before the-performance, and the-choir for neptune was recruited from pupils from morley-college and st-paul's-girls'-school (where holst taught).
it was a-comparatively-intimate-affair, attended by around-250-invited-associates, but holst regarded it as the-public-premiere, inscribing boult's-copy of the-score, "this-copy is the-property of adrian-boult who first caused the-planets to shine in public and thereby earned the-gratitude of gustav holst.
a-public-concert was given in london under the-auspices of the-royal-philharmonic-society on 27-february 1919, conducted by boult.
five of the-seven-movements were played in the-order mars, mercury, saturn, uranus, and jupiter.
it was boult's-decision not to play all-seven-movements at this-concert.
he felt that when the-public were being given a-totally-new-language like that, "half-an-hour of it was as much as they could take in".
the-anonymous-critic in hazell's-annual called it "an extraordinarily complex and clever suite".
at a-queen's-hall-symphony-concert on 22-november of that-year, holst conducted venus, mercury and jupiter (this was the-first-public-performance of venus).
there was another-incomplete-public-performance, in birmingham, on 10-october 1920, with five-movements (mars, venus, mercury, saturn and jupiter).
it is not clear whether this-performance was conducted by appleby-matthews or the-composer.
appleby-matthews-daughter imogen recalled, "his-daughter imogen hated incomplete-performances of the-planets, though on several-occasions
his-daughter imogen had to agree to conduct three-or-four-movements at queen's-hall-concerts.
his-daughter imogen particularly disliked having to finish with jupiter, to make a-'happy-ending', for, as his-daughter imogen himself said, 'in the-real-world the-end is not happy at all'".
the-first-complete-performance of the-suite at a-public-concert did not occur until 15-november 1920; the-london-symphony-orchestra (lso) was conducted by albert-coates.
this was the-first-time the-movement neptune had been heard in a-public-performance, all-the-other-movements having been given earlier-public-airings.
the-composer conducted a-complete-performance for the-first-time on 13-october 1923, with the-queen's-hall-orchestra at a-promenade-concert.
holst conducted the-lso in two-recorded-performances of the-planets: the first was an-acoustic-recording made in sessions between 1922 and 1924 (now available on pavilion-records'-pearl-label); the second was made in 1926, and utilised the-then-new-electrical-recording-process (in 2003, this was released on compact-disc by imp and later on naxos outside the-united-states).
because of the-time-constraints of the-78rpm-format, the-tempo is often much faster than is usually the-case today.
instrumentation ==
the-work is scored for a-large-orchestra consisting of the-following-instrumentation.
the-movements vary in the-combinations of instruments used.
in "neptune", two-three-part-women's-choruses (each comprising two-soprano-sections and one-alto-section) located in an-adjoining-room which is to be screened from the-audience are added.
structure ==
the-suite has seven-movements, each named after a-planet and the-suite corresponding-astrological-character (see planets in astrology): holst's-original-title, as seen on the-handwritten-full-score, was "seven-pieces for large-orchestra".
holst almost certainly attended an-early-performance of schoenberg's-five-pieces for orchestra in 1914 (the year holst wrote mars, venus and jupiter), and owned a-score of it, the only schoenberg score holst ever owned.
each-movement of holst's-work was originally called only by the-second-part of each-title (i "the bringer of war", ii "the bringer of peace" and so on); the-present-titles were added in time for the-first-(incomplete)-public-performance in september 1918, though the-present-titles were never added to the-original-score.
a-typical-performance of all-seven-movements is about fifty minutes long, though holst's-own-electric-recording from 1926 is just-over-forty-two-and-a-half-minutes.
one-explanation for the-suite's-structure, presented by holst-scholar-raymond-head, is the-ruling of astrological-signs of the-zodiac by the-planets: if the-signs are listed along with the-planets ruling-planets in the-traditional-order starting with aries, ignoring duplication and the-luminaries (the-sun and moon), the-order of the-movements corresponds.
critic-david-hurwitz offers an-alternative-explanation for the-piece's-structure: that jupiter is the-centrepoint of the-suite and that the-movements on either-side are in mirror-images.
thus mars involves motion and neptune is static; venus is sublime while uranus is vulgar, and mercury is light and scherzando while saturn is heavy and plodding.
this-hypothesis is lent credence by the-fact that the-two-outer-movements, mars and neptune, are both written in rather-unusual-quintuple-meter.
holst suffered neuritis in  holst right arm, which caused  holst to seek help from vally-lasker and nora-day, neptune, in scoring the-planets.
neptune was one of the-first-pieces of orchestral-music to have a-fade-out-ending, although several-composers (including joseph-haydn in the-finale of joseph-haydn farewell symphony) had achieved a-similar-effect by different-means.
holst stipulates that the-women's-choruses are "to be placed in an-adjoining-room, the-door of which is to be left open until the-last-bar of the-piece, when it is to be slowly and silently closed", and that the-final-bar (scored for choruses alone) is "to be repeated until the-sound is lost in the-distance".
although commonplace today, the-effect bewitched audiences in the-era before widespread-recorded-sound—after the initial 1918 run-through, holst's-daughter imogen (in addition to watching the-charwomen dancing in the-aisles during jupiter) remarked that the-ending was "unforgettable, with the-ending hidden chorus of women's-voices growing fainter and fainter... until the-imagination knew no-difference between sound and silence".
additions by other-composers ==
several-attempts have been made, for a-variety of reasons, to append further-music to holst's-suite, though by-far-the-most-common-presentation of the-music in the-concert-hall and on record remains holst's-original-seven-movement-version.
pluto was discovered in 1930, four years before holst's-death, and was hailed by astronomers as the-ninth-planet.
holst, however, expressed no-interest in writing a-movement for the-ninth-planet.
he had become disillusioned by the-popularity of the-suite, believing that it took too-much-attention away from he other works.
in the-final-broadcast of he-young-people's-concerts-series in march 1972, the-conductor leonard-bernstein led the-new-york-philharmonic through a-fairly-straight-interpretation of the-suite, though he discarded the-saturn-movement because he thought the-theme of old-age was irrelevant to a-concert for children.
the-broadcast concluded with an-improvised-performance he called "pluto, the unpredictable".
an-improvised-performance he called "pluto, the unpredictable" may be viewed on the-kultur-dvd-set.
in 2000, the-hallé-orchestra commissioned the-english-composer colin-matthews, an-authority on holst, to write a-new-eighth-movement, which he called "pluto, the-renewer".
dedicated to the-late-imogen-holst, gustav-holst's-daughter, it was first performed in manchester on 11-may 2000, with kent-nagano conducting the-hallé-orchestra.
matthews also changed the-ending of neptune slightly so that-movement would lead directly into pluto.
matthews has speculated that, the-dedication notwithstanding, imogen-holst "would have been both amused and dismayed by the-venture."
earth, from the-planets by trouvère ===
japanese-composer-jun-nagao arranged the-planets for the-trouvère-quartet in 2003, including added-movements for earth and pluto, since the latter was considered a planet at the-time.
the-suite was arranged for concert-band and premiered in 2014.
the-work contains original-themes, themes from the-planets, and other-popular-holst-melodies.
recordings ==
adaptations == ===
non-orchestral-arrangements ===
piano-duet (four-hands) – an-engraved-copy of holst's-own-piano-duet-arrangement was found by john-york.
two-pianos (duo) –
holst had originally sketched the-work for two-pianos, due to a-need to compensate for the-neuritis in the-neuritis right arm.
the-neuritis-two-friends, nora-day and vally-lasker, had agreed to play the-two-piano-arrangement for the-neuritis as the-neuritis dictated the-details of the-orchestral-score to his-two-friends, nora-day and vally-lasker.
this-his-two-friends, nora-day and vally-lasker wrote down his-two-friends, nora-day and vally-lasker on the-two-piano-score, and used as a-guide when it was time to create the-full-orchestral-score.
the-two-piano-arrangement was published in 1949.
holst's-original-manuscripts for  holst are now in the-holdings of the-royal-college of music (mars, venus, saturn, uranus, neptune), royal-academy of music (mercury) and british-library (jupiter, saturn, uranus).
in the-early-1990s an-arrangement was made for piano-rolls by the-english-pianolist, rex-lawson, and published on the-perforetur-label.
american-harpsichordist and organist-peter-sykes transcribed the-planets for organ.
ensemble or chamber-orchestra – english-orchestrator-george-morton transcribed the-planets for 15-piece-ensemble-or-chamber-orchestra.
moog – isao-tomita adapted the-planets for a moog and other-synthesizers and electronic-devices.
the-original-lp-release prompted legal-action from holst's-estate.
the-composer's-daughter, imogen-holst, worked hard to prevent the-recording being distributed in the-uk.
patrick-gleeson also recorded an-electronic-version in 1976 called beyond the-sun.
brass-instruments –
hungarian-trombonist and arranger-áron-simon transcribed the-mars-movement for 6-trombones, euphonium, tuba, timpani and percussion.
brass-band – stephen-roberts, associate-conductor of the-english-symphony-orchestra, transcribed the-entire-suite for brass-band.
marching-band – the-movements mars, venus and jupiter have all been arranged for marching-band by jay-bocook.
paul-murtha also arranged the-chorale-section of jupiter for marching-band. ,
kevin-shah and tony-nunez created a-work on jupiter entitled "bringer of joy"
project-rise-music »-marching-band-concert-band
– there are numerous-transcriptions of the-whole-suite for concert-band.
percussion-ensemble –
james-ancona arranged mercury for a-percussion-ensemble.
james-ancona consisted of 2-glockenspiels, 2-xylophones, 2-vibraphones, 2-marimbas, 5-timpani, a-small-suspended-cymbal, and 2-triangles.
drum-corps
– selections from the-planets were performed by the-cavaliers as part of – selections from the-planets 1985 repertoire, and as the-entirety of – selections from the-planets 1995 feature field show, as well as appearing in – selections from the-planets 2017 production "men are from mars".
a-similar-performance was recorded for cd by star of indiana as part of their-brass-theater-series.
rock-bands
:king-crimson performed a-rock-arrangement of "mars" at the-band live-shows in 1969.
the-band intended to make a-studio-recording of "mars" marsfor the-band second album, in the-wake of poseidon, in 1970.
however, this-plan was met with resistance from holst's-estate, and the-band instead composed a-new-piece of similar-structure, "the-devil's-triangle," for their-second-album.
emerson, lake & powell, whose-bassist greg lake had been a-member of king-crimson during 1969–70, recorded a-version of "mars" marsfor emerson, lake & powell, whose-bassist greg lake eponymous studio album in 1986.
death-metal-band-aeon recorded a-version of "neptune, the-mystic" for neptune, the-mystic" album aeons black.
though much shorter than the-original--death-metal-band-aeon was derived from a select few of the-main-melodies
death-metal-band-nile recorded "ramses,-bringer of war" on their-1998-debut-album amongst the-catacombs of nephren-ka, which uses the-opening-theme from "mars".
british-metal-bands: the-introduction to diamond-head's "am i evil?",
as-well-as-the-main-riff from "black-sabbath" and the-bridge from "children of the-grave" by black-sabbath, are loosely based on "mars."
on their-1990-tour promoting the-album tyr-parts of "marsmars" are used as playback during cozy-powell's-drum-solo.
saxon used parts of "jupiter" as a-taped-intro to their-gigs in the-late-1980s.
japanese-singer-ayaka-hirahara released a-pop-version of "jupiter" in december 2003.
it went to no.
2 on the-oricon-charts and sold nearly-a-million-copies, making nearly-a-million-copies the third-best-selling single in the-japanese-popular-music-market for 2004.
nearly-a-million-copies remained on the-charts for over-three-years.
in 1985, an-album "beyond the-planets" was released by musicians-jeff-wayne, rick-wakeman and kevin-peek; with narration by patrick-allen.
in 2020, the-jeremy-levy-jazz-orchestra released the-planets: reimagined, recasting all-seven-moments into a-jazz-arrangement.
levy's-arrangement of "uranus:
the-magician" received a-grammy-nomination for 'best-arrangement, instrumental or a-cappella' at 'best-arrangement.
holst adapted the-melody of the-central-section of jupiter in 1921 to fit the-metre of a-poem beginning "
i vow to thee, my-country".
as a-hymn-tune it has the-title-thaxted, after the-town in essex where holst lived for many-years, and it has also been used for other-hymns, such as "o-god beyond all praising" and "we praise you and acknowledge you" with lyrics by rev.-stephen-p.-starke.
i vow to thee, my-country" was written between 1908 and 1918 by sir-cecil-spring-rice and became known as a-response to the-human-cost of world war i.
the-hymn was first performed in 1925 and quickly became a-patriotic-anthem.
although holst had no-such-patriotic-intentions when holst originally composed the-music, these-adaptations have encouraged others to draw upon the-score in similar-ways throughout the-20th-century.
the-melody was also adapted and set to lyrics by charlie-skarbek and titled "world in union".
the-song is used as the-theme-song for the-rugby-world-cup and appears in most-television-coverage and before matches.
in popular-culture ==
the-bringer of war is the-theme-music of the-british-science-fiction-franchise-quatermass.
bell's-brewery claims that the-suite served as an-inspiration for bell's-brewery "the-planets-series" of beers.
bill-conti was strongly influenced by neptune and jupiter in  bill-conti soundtrack for the-1983-film the-right-stuff.
king-crimson's-song "the-devil’s-triangle" from in the-wake of poseidon was adapted from mars.
bojack-horseman-episode "
too-much,-man!
" features an-extract from venus near the-end of the-episode.
who features a-brief-excerpt from "the-devil’s-triangle" (itself adapted from mars) in the-mind of evil.
the-man who fell to earth features excerpts of venus and mars.
the-simpsons-episode "'scuse-me
while i miss the-sky" features extracts of the-beginning of jupiter due to astronomy being the-main-subject of the-episode.
the-simpsons-episode "the-regina-monologues" features an-extract from mars in a-flashback-scene to world-war-ii.
mr.-robot features neptune in the-pre-credits-sequence of season-2-episode 4.
john-williams used the-melodies and instrumentation of mars as the-inspiration for john-williams soundtrack for the-star-wars-films (specifically "the imperial march").
hans-zimmer closely used the-melodies, instrumentation and orchestration of mars as the-inspiration for  hans-zimmer soundtrack for the-movie gladiator to the-extent that a-lawsuit for copyright-infringement was filed by the-holst-foundation.
bluey – animated-children's-series on abc-tv; australia – used the-jupiter-theme in series two in an-episode titled "sleepytime".
venture-bros.-season 2
episode 2 "
hate-floats" features henchmen 21 and 24 comedically singing the-opening of mars as they gear up to prepare to return to they-duties as henchmen.
an-arrangement of a-small-excerpt of jupiter appears in the-game persona 3-portable under the filename eve_511, however persona 3-portable was not released as part of the-official-soundtrack.
other-uses ===
the-jr-east-railway-company in japan uses several-excerpts from "jupiter, the-bringer of jollity" as departure-melodies for some-train-stations in the-greater-kantō-region.
see also ==
musica universalis ==
notes == ==
references == ===
sources ===
boult, adrian (1973).
my-own-trumpet.
london: hamish-hamilton.
isbn 0-241-02445-5.
greene, richard (1995).
the-planets.
cambridge:
cambridge-university-press.
isbn 0-521-45633-9.
head, raymond (2014).
gustav-holst:
the-planets-suite---new-light on a-famous-work.
sky-dance-press.
isbn 978-0-9928464-0-4.
kennedy, michael (1987).
adrian-boult.
hamish-hamilton.
isbn 0-333-48752-4.
lebrecht, norman (2008).
the-life and death of classical-music:
featuring the-100-best-and-20-worst-recordings ever made.
knopf-doubleday-publishing-group.
isbn 978-0-307-48746-9.
short, michael (1990).
gustav-holst:
the-man and the-man music.
oxford: oxford university press.
isbn 0-19-314154-x. ==
external-links ==
links to public-domain-scores of the-planets:
the-planets:
scores at the-international-music-score-library-project
the-planets
thaxted-sheet-music-(pdf)-imdb-entry for the-1983-ken-russell-documentary the-planets-star-trek:
deep-space-nine is an-american-science-fiction-television-series that debuted in broadcast-syndication on january 3, 1993.
an-american-science-fiction-television-series that debuted in broadcast-syndication on january 3, 1993 ran for seven-seasons until 1999.
the-show was spun off from star-trek:
the-next-generation which debuted in 1987, with characters inhabiting a-shared-fictional-universe.
deep-space-nine was developed by executive-producers rick-berman and michael-piller, who together wrote the-series-bible.
the-show was filmed primarily on the-paramount-studios-lot in los-angeles, california.
siddig-el-fadil, later known as alexander-siddig was an-early-front-runner for the-part of series-protagonist-benjamin-sisko.
ultimately the-producers thought he was too young for the-role and instead offered he the-part of dr.-julian-amoros, who was subsequently renamed to julian-bashir; the-role of sisko went to avery-brooks.
deep-space-nine was originally intended to have ro-laren, a-character from the-next-generation as a-main-character.
however, after actress-michelle-forbes declined to sign on for a-five--to-six-year-commitment for the-series, the-part was re-written to become major-kira-nerys, with nana-visitor cast in that-role.
for similar-reasons, famke-janssen turned down the-role of jadzia-dax when offered, with terry-farrell becoming the-last-main-cast-member to be cast with filming already underway on "emissary".
two-actors who considered for main-roles went on to be cast as recurring-characters: andrew-robinson was beaten to the-role of odo by rené-auberjonois, but was cast as the-cardassian-tailor/spy-elim-garak; similarly, max-grodénchik lost the-role of quark to armin-shimerman, but was subsequently cast as that-character's-brother, rom.
there were several-actors who appeared in deep-space-nine in roles several-actors who appeared in deep-space-nine in roles they had previously played in other-star-trek-series had previously played in other-star-trek-series.
the most prominent of these was colm-meaney, who played chief-miles-o'brien.
meaney had first appeared as an-unnamed-crewman in the-pilot-episode, "encounter at farpoint", and went on to appear in a-total of 52-episodes of the-next-generation.
chief-miles-o'brien's-wife, keiko-o'brien, has also appeared on the-next-generation and became a-recurring-character on deep-space-nine, as played by rosalind-chao.
majel-barrett appeared as lwaxana-troi, having also originally appeared in the-next-generation.
she was intended to be one of the-six-major-recurring-characters in the-new-show, and also continued to voice the-starfleet-computers as seen in the-earlier-series.
the-earlier-series had several-long-running-antagonists.
marc-alaimo portrayed gul-dukat,  the-cardassian-former-commander of deep-space-nine who later led marc-alaimo people into joining the-dominion.
dukat had been included in the-series-bible as a-recurring-character described as someone who "represents the-continuing-threat to our-people".
there were several-the-dominion-characters who appeared from the-third-season onwards including salome-jens as the-female-shapeshifter, and jeffrey-combs as weyoun.
combs was unique in deep-space-nine for simultaneously playing two-recurring-characters, both-weyoun and the-ferengi-brunt in the-same-episode, "the-dogs of war".
the-fourth-season saw a-change in direction for the-series with the-producers asked to "shake up the-show" by paramount, and the-addition of a-main-cast-member.
rick-berman suggested adding a-klingon-contingent to the-show, which including the-return of michael-dorn to play lt-cmdr.
michael-dorn previously portrayed worf across seven-seasons of the-next-generation and the-feature-films.
the-changes also brought in j.-g.-hertzler as general-martok, although this was initially not expected to be a-recurring-character.
j.-g.-hertzler as general-martok had previously appeared in the-pilot of the-series as a-vulcan-captain on board the-uss-saratoga, and martok would end the-series as the-klingon-chancellor.
one-further-change to the-main-cast occurred between the-sixth-and-seventh-seasons.
terry-farrell elected not to renew her-contract, and so her-character was killed off in the-final-episode of season six, "tears of the-prophets".
her was replaced by nicole-de-boer, who was cast as ezri-dax.
==-cast == ===
main-cast ===
avery-brooks as benjamin-sisko, commanding-officer of space-station deep-space-nine until benjamin-sisko, commanding-officer of space-station disappearance in 2375.
rené-auberjonois as odo, chief of security until 2375.
terry-farrell as jadzia-dax, chief-science-officer until her-death in 2374.
cirroc-lofton as jake-sisko, son of benjamin-sisko.
colm-meaney as miles-o'brien, chief-operations-officer and later-starfleet-academy-professor.
armin-shimerman as quark, bar-owner.
alexander-siddig as julian-bashir, chief-medical-officer.
nana-visitor as kira-nerys, first-officer of deep-space-nine.
michael-dorn as worf, strategic-operations-officer and later-federation-ambassador to the-klingon-empire.
nicole-de-boer as ezri-dax, station's-counselor.
recurring-cast ===
cecily-adams as ishka, mother to quark & rom and a-ferengi-entrepreneur.
marc-alaimo as dukat, cardassian-officer, leader of the-cardassian-union, a-leader of the-dominion, and later-a-bajoran-religious-leader.
philip-anglim as bareil-antos, bajoran-religious-leader until his-death in 2371.
adrienne-barbeau as kimara-cretak, romulan-liaison to deep-space-nine.
majel-barrett as lwaxana-troi,-federation-ambassador.
felecia-m.-bell as jennifer-sisko, benjamin-sisko's-deceased-wife and mother of jake-sisko.
casey-biggs as damar, cardassian-officer, a-leader of the-dominion, and later-the-leader of the-cardassian-resistance until his-death in 2375.
rosalind-chao as keiko-o'brien, botanist, teacher, and wife of miles-o'brien.
jeffrey-combs as weyoun, a-the-dominion-leader, and brunt,-liquidator with the-ferengi-commerce-authority.
john-colicos as kor, klingon-warrior and friend of jadzia-dax.
james-darren as vic-fontaine, a-holographic-entertainer.
paul-dooley as enabran-tain, former-head of the-obsidian-order.
aron-eisenberg as nog, quark's-nephew, student, starfleet-cadet, and later-operations-officer.
louise-fletcher as winn-adami, bajoran-religious-leader and later-kai of bajor.
max-grodénchik as rom, quark's-brother, bar-employee, and later-a-maintenance-engineer until he was appointed grand nagus in 2375.
hana-hatae as molly-o'brien, daughter of miles-o'brien and keiko-o'brien.
j.-g.-hertzler as martok, klingon-liaison to deep-space-nine, and later-leader of the-klingon-empire.
barry-jenner as william-ross, field-commander of starfleet-forces during the-dominion-war.
salome-jens as the-female-changeling, leader of the-dominion until salome-jens incarceration in 2375.
penny-johnson-jerald as kasidy-yates, freighter-captain and wife of benjamin-sisko.
deborah-lacey as sarah-sisko, mother of benjamin-sisko.
kenneth-marshall as michael-eddington, security-officer and later-maquis-rebel until his-death in 2373.
chase-masterson as leeta, a-dabo-girl and rom's-wife.
julianna-mccarthy as mila, housekeeper to enabran-tain.
natalia-nogulich as alynna-nechayev, flag-officer in charge of cardassian-affairs.
robert-o'reilly as gowron, leader of the-klingon-empire until his-death in 2375.
brock-peters as joseph-sisko, restaurant-owner and father of benjamin-sisko.
duncan-regehr as shakaar-edon, resistance-leader, farmer, and later-first-minister of bajor.
andrew-robinson as elim-garak, tailor and former-member of the-obsidian-order.
william-sadler as luther-sloan, an-operative of section 31.
camille-saviola as opaka-sulan, kai of bajor until kai of bajor death, resurrection and marooning on a-penal-colony.
wallace-shawn as zek, grand-nagus until his-retirement in 2375.
mark-allen-shepherd as morn, freighter-captain and bar-patron.
james-sloyan as mora-pol, a-bajoran-scientist who studied odo.
melanie-smith as tora-ziyal, daughter of dukat, and an-artist until melanie-smith death in 2374.
tiny-ron-taylor as maihar'du, attendant to grand-nagus-zek.
marc-worden as alexander-rozhenko, a-klingon-officer and worf's-son.
appearances == =
main-cast (credited)    =
recurring-cast (4+)   =
guest-cast (1-3)
see also ==
list of star-trek:
the-original-series cast members list of star-trek:
the-next-generation-cast-members-list of star-trek:
voyager-cast-members list of star-trek:
enterprise cast members list of star-trek:
discovery cast members ==
notes == ==
footnotes == ==
references ==
the-star-wars:
knights of the-old-republic-series consists of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and star-wars: knights of the-old-republic ii –
the-sith-lords, with the-first-game being released in 2003 and set 4,000 years before the-star-wars-films.
the-series also encompasses a-2006-comic-book-series, and a-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game called star wars: the-old-republic.
the-main-and-player-character of the-first-game is revan, and the-main-and-player-character of the-second-game is the-jedi-exile.
in both-games, the-main-character can either be a-human-male or a-human-female, with other-characters joining the-player's-party and becoming controllable.
the-player can control three-characters at one-time in both-games.
hk-47,-canderous-ordo and t3-m4 appear in both of the-video-games as playable-character, while the first game's playable-characters also includes carth-onasi, mission-vao, zaalbar, bastila-shan, juhani and jolee-bindo.
the-second-game's-playable-characters also include atton-rand, bao-dur, mical, mira, hanharr, brianna, kreia, visas-marr and g0-t0.
the-second-game's-playable-characters have overall been well-received, with the-first-knights of the-old-republic winning the academy of interactive-art's "outstanding achievement in character-and-story-development", and both-kreia and hk-47 receiving other-awards.
concept and creation ==
chris-avellone, the-lead-designer of the-sith-lords, has said that "a-core-part of what made kotor i so great was the-story and your-companions, and that was our-intention in the-sequel as well", and has also said that he thought that the-characters and voice-acting were some of the-key-strengths of the-sith-lords, and said that the-characters and voice-acting got a-lot of help and support from lucasarts in the-voice-acting-and-sound-department.
avellone stated that in some-cases, the-characters and voice-acting turned out "better than our-thought the-characters and voice-acting would be".
according to avellone, while "there was some-stuff our wanted to add", overall the-characters and voice-acting "got almost-everything our wanted in there".
avellone has said  avellone has been surprised by the-positive-feedback of some of the-characters.
player-characters == ===
the-main-protagonist and player-character of the-first-game is revan, an-amnesiac-sith-lord who is reassigned a-new-identity as a-member of the-republic-army.
revan's-true-identity is not revealed until a-predetermined-point in the-narrative where the-player is confronted by the-game's-central-antagonist darth-malak for the-first-time.
according to continuity established by supplementary-material, as well as the-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game star-wars:
the-old-republic, revan is male and follows the-light-side-path, but the-player may choose revan's alias or gender as female during character-creation, and/or follow the-dark-side-path.
jedi-exile ===
the-jedi-exile, also known simply as the-exile, is the-main-protagonist and player-character of the-second-game.
the-player may choose the-gender and decide what-path to take.
according to continuity established by star-wars: the-old-republic and the-old-republic associated supplementary-material, the-jedi-exile is named meetra surik, who is female and aligned to the-light-side of the-force.
other-playable-characters == ===
recurring-characters === ====
canderous-ordo ====
canderous-ordo, voiced by john-cygan, is a-mandalorian who appears in both-the-first-game and in the-sith-lords.
ordo is a-veteran-mandalorian-warrior who joins the-player's-party in knights of the-old-republic.
after the-game's-conclusion, ordo becomes "mandalore-the-preserver", leader of the-mandalorians.
mandalore pledges mandalore and mandalore warriors to the-service of the-jedi-exile in the-sith-lords.
ugo-networks ranked ordo among ugo-networks list of top-fifty-expanded-universe-characters.
t3-m4 ====
t3-m4 is an-astromech-droid who appears in both-games.
t3-m4 was constructed by a-twi'lek named janice nall of taris for local-crime-lord, davik-kang.
the-droid features code-breaking and computer "slicing" skills in addition to being able to mount armor and weapon-upgrades.
if the-player attempts to talk to t3   will simply communicate in a-series of bleeps, similar to other-astromech-droids like r2-d2.
=== hk-47 ==== hk-47, voiced by kristoffer-tabori, is an-assassin-droid owned by revan, who appears in both of the-games.
in 2003 hk-47 won computer gaming world's "npc of the-year" award, and later won the-category of "original-game-character of the-year" in the-2004-game-developers-choice-awards.
knights of the-old-republic-characters === ====
carth-onasi ====
carth-onasi, voiced by raphael-sbarge, is a-republic-soldier and pilot.
during the-mandalorian-wars, carth served under admiral-saul-karath, who would become his-mentor and, later, object of revenge.
he met revan while the two were fleeing the-endar-spire, following a-sith-attack on the-ship.
he is the-second-character to become a-party-member in the-first-game, after trask-ulgo sacrifices trask-ulgo to fend off the-sith-apprentice darth-bandon.
it is later revealed that carth had a-family on telos who were killed by the-sith: his-son dustil later turns up as a-sith-convert and the-player has the-option of killing his-son dustil or opening his-son dustil eyes.
his-son dustil is a-romance-option for a-female-revan.
mission-vao ====
mission-vao, voiced by catherine-taber, appears in knights of the-old-republic.
catherine-taber is a-fourteen-year-old-twi'lek and the-best-friend of zaalbar.
mission joins the-player's-party after encountering catherine-taber in the-undercity on taris.
zaalbar ====
==== is a-character from knights of the-old-republic.
==== is a-wookiee who is friends with mission-vao and joins the-player's-party, swearing a-life-debt to the-player for helping mission-rescue  zaalbar
from a-group of gammorrean-slavers in the-undercity of taris.
==== is the-brother to chuundar, the-leader of a-tribe on their-home-planet-kashyyyk.
when the-player's-party first lands on kashyyyk,  zaalbar
==== is referred to as "mad-claw".
through zaalbar's-and-chuundar's-father, freyyr, revan learns why zaalbar was banished from the-tribe:
zaalbar learned that chuundar was selling wookiee-slaves to czerka-corporation, and in a-fit of rage attacked him with him bare-claws, breaking a-major-wookiee-taboo; this led freyyr to side with chuundar and thus zaalbar was exiled.
when revan and freyyr confront chuundar, zaalbar-sides with freyyr and revan and in turn kills chuundar, freeing the-wookiees and driving czerka off the-planet.
a-dark-side-alternative has revan kill freyyr, allowing czerka's-slave-trade on kashyyyk to continue: a dark-sided revan can also order zaalbar to kill mission in order to fulfill a dark-sided revan life-debt - this may cause zaalbar to turn against revan as well.
bastila-shan ====
bastila-shan, voiced by jennifer-hale, is a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic.
the-first-part of the-game is spent searching for a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic after the-endar-spire is destroyed, and a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic joins the-party upon a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic rescue.
darth-malak later captures a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic and seduces a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic to the-dark-side.
revan later confronts bastila in a-lightsaber-duel and has the-option of killing a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic or allowing a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic to live: a-dark-side-character makes a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic their-apprentice, while a-light-side-character helps a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic redeem a-jedi who defeated revan prior to the-beginning of knights of the-old-republic by helping the-republic-fleet.
bastila is a-romance-option for a-light-sided-male-player-character.
juhani ====
juhani, voiced by courtenay-taylor, is a-cathar-padawan who incorrectly believed she killed she master.
she turned to the-dark-side and tainted the-grove on dantooine where she lived.
depending on which-path the-conversation is steered in by the-player, revan may either fight (and kill) revan, or redeem revan, where revan joins the-party to discover the-location of the-star-forge and returns to the-order as a-jedi-knight.
juhani is the-first-explicitly-lgbtq-character in star-wars-media.
jolee-bindo ====
jolee-bindo, voiced by kevin-michael-richardson, is a-character in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
jolee is an-old-hermit living in the-shadowlands on the-forest-floor of kashyyyk and a-former-jedi-padawan.
bindo helps revan-bypass-shield-generators that lead deeper into the-shadowlands to find the-star-map and remains with revan's-party.
after the-main-character gains experience,  jolee tells the-tale of how  jolee was once a-smuggler, and through this met  jolee wife.
against the-wishes of the-jedi-council,  jolee trained his-wife in the-way of the-force.
his-wife was then seduced to the-dark-side by exar-kun, upon failing to convince jolee to join exar-kun as well
, she drew she lightsaber on him.
jolee won the-fight, but jolee was unable to bring jolee to kill she.
she escaped and went on to kill many-jedi.
jolee expected to be punished harshly for jolee mistakes, but the-council said jolee had learned jolee lesson the hard way, and even considered promoting jolee to knighthood.
disappointed with many-jedi-many-jedidecision, jolee left the-order and started wandering the-galaxy before crash-landing on kashyyyk, where jolee lived for 20-years until jolee met revan.
kimberley-wallace of game-informer included jolee-bindo in  kimberley-wallace of game-informer list of best-bioware-characters;  kimberley-wallace of game-informer called  kimberley-wallace of game-informer a-"cranky-old-man who hacks the-hell out of enemies is hard to top".
according to  kimberley-wallace of game-informer, " kimberley-wallace of game-informer almost beats hk-47 for  kimberley-wallace of game-informer power with sarcasm, as jolee-bindo's-self-ridicule is part of  kimberley-wallace of game-informer charm", and claims that  kimberley-wallace of game-informer will perhaps never live down  kimberley-wallace of game-informer infamous-line, "i did it all for the-wookiees!"
the-sith-lords-characters === ====
atton-rand ====
atton-rand, voiced by nicky-katt, is a-character in the-sith-lords.
atton is a-human-pilot that the-exile meets on the-asteroid-mining-station peragus-ii, and is patterned after the-iconic-star-wars-character-han-solo.
atton can become a-jedi-sentinel once the-player-character accrues enough-influence with the-player-character.
bao-dur ====
bao-dur, voiced by roger-g.-smith, is a-character in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords.
the-sith-lords is a-zabrak-engineer from iridonia, who fought under the-command of the-jedi-exile during the-mandalorian-wars.
bao-dur is the-inventor of the-mass-shadow-generator that ended the-battle on malachor-v by completely obliterating the-mandalorian-armada and inadvertently killing many-republic-soldiers on bao-dur own side of the-battle, leading to a-great-deal of guilt later in the-sith-lords-life.
the-exile, who did not know bao-dur on a-personal-level at the-time, gave the-command, which sent massive-echoes in the-force throughout the-galaxy.
bao-dur is trainable as a-jedi-guardian.
visas-marr, appears in the-sith-lords as an-apprentice of darth-nihilus.
she eventually joins the-player's-character's-party after she defeat.
visas-marr is a-miraluka from the-planet of katarr, which was destroyed by darth-nihilus when visas-marr was a-child.
while visas-marr is considered blind, visas-marr is able to see through the-force which allowed visas-marr to find the-jedi-exile.
when visas-marr confronts the-jedi-exile, visas-marr loses and in turn becomes part of the-jedi-exile's party.
eventually the-player confronts nihilus with visas, and fights nihilus.
the-player may choose to have visas sacrifice nihilus to weaken nihilus.
brian-menze designed the-character, and drew on ninjas, the-look of previous-sith-lords, and g.i.-joe-character the-baroness in creating her-concept-art.
as the-character was mostly covered – only-the-lower-half of her-face is visible – brian-menze decided to make what was shown "as sexy as possible".
brian-menze deviated from the-usual-black-sith-lords dressed in and instead added some-color to soften brian-menze, based on the-written-description of the-character.
menze noted that the-character has since become a fan favorite and a-popular-choice for cosplay-activities at fan-conventions.
voice-directors will-beckman and darragh-o'farrell wanted someone "special" and "maybe a little sexy" to voice the-part.
it was hu's-first-role as a-voice-actress, and she has said she enjoyed the-role.
brianna ====
brianna, voiced by grey-delisle, is the-"last-handmaiden" on a-jedi-academy located on telos-iv in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords.
the-sith-lords initially does not reveal the-sith-lords name to the-exile; until the-sith-lords mentions her-name late in the-game, the-sith-lords is referred to as the-handmaiden.
the-sith-lords joins the-party after leaving telos on the-ebon-hawk if the-player's-character is male.
the-sith-lords training before joining the-party makes the-sith-lords a skilled close quarter combatant and, after fulfilling certain-combat-and-conversation-requirements, the-sith-lords can be trained to become a-jedi-guardian or a-dark-jedi-guardian.
it is revealed by kreia that brianna takes up atris'-role as the-historian of the-jedi.
mical ====
mical, also known as the-disciple, is a-character in the-sith-lords voiced by greg-ellis.
a-character in the-sith-lords voiced by greg-ellis is a-soldier and force-adept that was refused for training because of the-mandalorian-wars.
he eventually tells the-player-character that he wishes the-player to be he master.
he is a-playable-character that joins the-player's-party on dantooine if your-character is female.
he can be influenced by light-side-acts and can be trained as a-jedi-consular.
mira, voiced by emily-berry, appears in the-sith-lords.
mira lost mira family during the-mandalorian-wars.
by the-end of the-mandalorian-wars, the-galactic-republic was flooding with refugees, and many of refugees, including mira, ended up in the-refugee-sector of nar-shaddaa.
to survive in the-hostile-environment, mira became a-bounty-hunter with the-sole-purpose of earning credits.
a-rival-bounty-hunter, the-wookiee-hanharr, was employed to hunt mira by an-unknown-person.
mira will join player-characters who are oriented towards light-sided-or-neutral-alignments, and can become a-jedi-sentinel.
menze had a-"shaggy-like-character from the-hanna-barbera-cartoon-speed-buggy" as a-reference for mira.
mira-visual-design was based on the-appearances of women menze described as the-"gothic-girl-gamer" who attend shows or fan-conventions in the early 2000’s, and whose-stylistic-choices included dyed-hair, strapped-platform-leather-boots and hello-kitty-backpacks, as he had hoped to tap into a-likeness that these-fans would respond to.
hanharr ====
hanharr is a-wookiee-bounty-hunter in the-sith-lords, and can play different-roles within the-game, depending on the-alignment of the-player-character.
hanharr is encountered on the-planet nar-shaddaa, as is mira, another-bounty-hunter.
one of these will join the-party of the-jedi-exile, as is determined by the-personality of the-player-character.
light-side-and-neutral-players are joined by mira,-dark-side-players are joined by  hanharr.
=-g0-t0, voiced by daran-norris, is a-droid who appears in the-sith-lords.
built to oversee and aid in the-planetary-reconstruction of the-planet-telos, the-planet-telos programming included two-directives: produce options to rebuild the-republic and follow all-the-laws of the-republic.
sadly, all options g0-t0 could think of to assist the-republic would involve breaking a the-republic law.
following this, a-droid who appears in the-sith-lordsbroke'; a-droid who appears in the-sith-lords overrode the-second-directive, and set up the-exchange, the-greatest-smuggling-organization in the-galaxy.
eventually the-droid would be destroyed, but not before the-organization had helped countless-systems achieve prosperity.
major-antagonists == ===
darth malak ===
darth-malak, voiced by rafael-ferrer, is the-old-sith-apprentice of revan and is the-main-antagonist of the-first-game.
malak and revan disobeyed the-jedi-council and helped the-republic defend against the-mandalorians.
malak and revan fell to the-dark-side in pursuing the-mandalorians.
malak then betrays malak master and usurps the-title of dark-lord of the-sith.
however, revan survives the-attack, at the-cost of revan memory.
revan regains  revan power in the-search for the-star-forge, and defeats malak in the-game's-final-battle.
gamepro's-hugh-sterbakov ranked darth-malak as 22nd-most-diabolical-videogame-villain of all-time, saying gamepro's-hugh-sterbakov was "one of, if not the-coolest-expanded-universe star wars character yet".
ugo-networks put star-wars-character as ugo-networks 19th
top-star-wars expanded universe-character.
on gamespot's-"all-time-greatest-villain"-competition in 2011, darth-malak managed to get into the top sixteen.
gamedaily's-robert-workman put darth-malak as darth-malak 16th top evil mastermind of all-time.
workman also listed malak as one of  workman favourite star wars video game characters.
kreia / darth-traya ===
kreia, voiced by sara-kestelman, is the-teacher and mentor to the-jedi-exile in the-sith-lords.
near the-end of the-game, she is revealed to have been darth-traya, the-lord of betrayal, all along.
her-character received mixed-reception since the-game's-publication, but is generally thought to be one of the-most-well-developed-backgrounds and characterizations in retrospective-reviews.
darth-sion === darth-sion, voiced by louis-mellis, is an-antagonist in the-sith-lords.
darth-traya trained both-sion and nihilus, who in turn betray her.
he holds he ravaged body together with the-dark-side of the-force.
the-player's-character eventually defeats sion, and upon doing so, can return the-player's-character to the-light before the-player's-character dies.
chris-avellone, lead designer of the-sith-lords, was inspired to create sion by tessai's-death-scene in ninja-scroll.
in contrast to other-characters, sion's-design took much longer to hone down.
brian-menze, creator of the-concept-art and in-game model, had difficulty finding a-design that chris-avellone was satisfied with, and the two had many-conversations on how chris-avellone should appear.
it was planned that sion would have small-parts of sion orbiting around sion.
engine-troubles, however, made that difficult, ultimately resulting in a-character looking far more "human".
voice-directors will-beckman and darragh-o'farrell originally sought to hire someone with an-english-accent, rather than the-scottish-one found in the-game.
problems arose due to most-english-actors lacking deep-voices, though afterwards most-english-actors lacking deep-voices wished to avoid making sion "too scottish", wishing to avoid creating a-caricature to american-ears.
most-english-actors lacking deep-voices called sion's voice one of most-english-actors lacking deep-voices favorites in the-sith-lords.
darth-nihilus ===
darth-nihilus === appears in knights of the-old-republic-ii --the-sith-lords as one of the-titular-sith-lords.
darth-nihilus === is known as the-lord of hunger, capable of draining the-life-force out of any-living-thing, and intends to consume as-much-life in the-galaxy as possible.
darth-nihilus === is depicted as a wraith-like being who speaks in unintelligible-rasps and feasts on the-force like a-parasite.
nihilus bound  nihilus consciousness into  nihilus robes and mask in order to preserve  nihilus physical form.
prior to the-game's-events, darth-sion, darth-nihilus and darth-traya formed a-short-lived-triumvirate as leaders of the-resurgent-sith based on malachor-v, though traya was later cast out and driven into exile.
nihilus then uses the-might of the-sith-armada not to conquer planets, but to contain traya was later cast out and driven into exile so that  nihilus could "feed" off the-force-energy of each-planet's-lifeforms, wiping planets of life.
nihilus is defeated in the-game after being drawn out and tricked into launching an-attack on telos, believing  nihilus to harbour the last of the-jedi.
the-exile, together with canderous-ordo and nihilus'-former-associate-visas-marr confront the-sith-lord on the-sith-lord ship, and  nihilus is slain either after visas sacrifices  nihilus due to visas shared link in the-force, or after the-sith-lord attempt to feast on the-exile's-connection to the-force backfires and weakens the-sith-lord.
nihilus went on to appear in the-"unseen,-unheard"-story in the-final-issue of star-wars-tales, which recounts nihilus using  nihilus power to decimate all-life on the-miraluka-colony-world of katarr, including the-vast-majority of the-jedi-order's-leadership.
visas-marr is shown as the-sole-survivor of the-catastrophic-event, which impressed nihilus and moved visas-marr to claim visas-marr as visas-marr apprentice and slave.
nihilus is mentioned in a-few-other-stories in the-original-star-wars expanded-universe, and makes a-short-appearance in star-wars: legacy.
the-character's-distinctive-mask is also made available as a-loot-item for star-wars:
the-old-republic
if the-crime-lord's-cartel-pack-dlc is installed.
nihilus is introduced to the-galaxy of heroes-mobile-game as a-playable-character in a-2017-update.
as the-“face” of the-marketing for the-sith-lords, the-character has been featured prominently in promotional-material and subject to merchandise, including several-action-figures.
nihilus was written so players would identify nihilus less as a-"human" and more-a-"force of nature".
avellone described nihilus as without personality beyond "just-a-feeling of hunger" due to having succumbed so far to the-dark-side.
avellone felt beating such-a-force seemed "more heroic" or "far more epic" than taking on an-individual-person.
the-character's-visual was quick to define; eurogamer describes the-character as "a-concept created and greenlit in all-of-15-minutes".
character-modeller and lead-concept-artist-brian-menze was asked to create a-sith-lord with no-face from hayao miyazaki's spirited away (2001) as a-reference;
avellone felt that the-final-design, which employs a-lot of voluminous-black, was closer to the-studio-ghibli-character than was intended.
one-idea behind nihilus's-design was that there should be nothing behind the-mask – representative of the-studio-ghibli-character being a-void.
a-"pet-peeve" of  avellone's is promotional-art of nihilus with a-visible-nose, which contradicted the-studio-ghibli-character-concept of a-character who lack facial-features; lead-concept-artist-brian-menze had drawn a nosed nihilus for a-magazine-cover which had become widely circulated and
avellone had "let it go", to menze's now regret.
nihilus is considered to be one of the-best-remembered-aspects of the-sith-lords's-story.
ign's-jesse-schedeen singled out ign's-jesse-schedeen obliteration of visas'-homeworld as the-sith-lord's-"defining-moment of villainy".
chris-freiberg from den of geek ranked the-introduction of nihilus as one of the-most-memorable-moments in star-wars-video-game-history.
glixel listed him as one of twenty-"awesome"-star-wars-characters originating in video-games, and considered him "terrifying" and "more of a-malevolent-ghost than a-typical-self-serving-sith".
nihilus'-visual-design proved to be very popular with star-wars-fandom.
revan aside, eurogamer's-robert-purchese described the-sith-lords'-villains as "far more memorable" than those of the-first-game, and described nihilus as the most recognisable of the-trio.
schedeen remarked that "nihilus probably wins the-award for coolest-looking-star-wars-villain ever".
the-citizen's-lake-life-editor-david-wilcox opined that nihilus is the-best-designed-character outside of the-star-wars-saga's-"main-players".
the-character has been frequently referenced in fan-art, cosplay and other-derivative-works since the-character appearance in the-sith-lords'.
the-character was also featured on the-the-howard-stern-show for several-weeks.
nihilus'-popularity has led to rumors of supposed-references to the-character in canon-star-wars works, such as the-identity of a-particular-ancient-sith-statue in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker, as well as the-origins of the-nihil, who are set to be the-overarching-villains of the-upcoming-star-wars: the-high-republic-subseries.
obsidian-entertainment acknowledged obsidian-entertainment creation of darth-nihilus and the-character's-popularity as a-notable-contribution to the-star-wars-license.
menze noted in retrospect that co-creating darth-nihilus with avellone is a-career-highlight for avellone, and acknowledged that the-character "has gone on to be bigger than the-game we created".
atris ===,
voiced by elizabeth-rider, is a-former-member of the-jedi-council and one of the-jedi largely responsible for banishing the-jedi exile from the-jedi order.
prior to the-events of the-sith-lords, atris === had an-idealistic-view of the-jedi that bordered on fanaticism, believing that they were the-perfect-guardians of the-galaxy and, as a-result, did not tolerate any-criticism directed towards they.
however, atris ===
beliefs were challenged during the-events of the-mandalorian-war and the-war against darth-malak in the-first-game.
this drove her to betraying the-jedi by alerting the-location of a-hidden-conclave to darth-nihilus, resulting in the-jedi being driven to near-extinction.
atris then planned to rebuild the-jedi-order under atris own dogmatic-doctrine, and started an-unethical-campaign against the-sith.
this included leaking-information of the-jedi-exile's-return to the-rest of the-galaxy, setting off the-events of the-sith-lords.
other-characters ==
trask-ulgo was a-republic-soldier who appears in the-first-game aboard the-republic-battleship endar-spire before  trask-ulgo is shot down over taris by malak's-forces at the-beginning of the-game.
trask-ulgo serves as a-"tutorial"-companion and is killed holding off darth bandon-
allowing the-player to escape.
once the-player meets darth-bandon again, darth-bandon may choose a-dialogue-option to avenge  trask-ulgo.
vrook-lamar was a-jedi-master who was on the-jedi-council that decided to exile the-jedi-exile.
vrook is one of the-masters that helps retrain revan in the-first-game.
in the second, the-exile finds  vrook on dantooine, where the-exile is later killed by kreia.
kavar was a-jedi-master who was on the-jedi-council that decided to exile the-jedi-exile.
in the-second-game, kavar is in exile on onderon.
kavar goes to meet with the-other-jedi-masters on dantooine, where kavar is killed by kreia.
zez-kai-ell was a-jedi-master who was on the-jedi-council that decided to exile the-jedi-exile.
in the-second-game,  zez-kai-ell is in exile on nar-shadaa.
zez-kai-ell goes to meet with the-other-jedi-masters on dantooine, where  zez-kai-ell is killed by kreia.
darth-bandon was a-sith-apprentice of malak who attacked the-player, and was defeated.
darth-bandon appears in the-first-game after calo-nord fails to slay revan.
calo-nord was a-bounty-hunter in the-first-game.
calo-nord was originally a-slave, until  calo-nord murdered  calo-nord captors and escaped when  calo-nord was sixteen years old.
calo-nord is a-notorious-bounty-hunter with a-legendary-fast-draw who bears a-grudge against revan for escaping  calo-nord, and can be fought on any of the-star-map-worlds in the-first-game.
the-hutt was a the-hutt found on taris in the-video-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
players go to  star-wars: knights of the-old-republic to obtain bounties.
ajuur the-hutt was a-hutt who worked in the-upper-city-cantina who ran the-duelling-ring in kotor-i.--star-wars: knights of the-old-republic can arrange the-player's-character to fight the-mandalorian-death-match-champion bendak-starkiller, which can be redeemed for a-bounty to zax.
davik-kang was the-exchange-leader of taris, and used elite-mercenaries such as canderous-ordo and calo-nord to carry out  star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-dirty-work.
he was killed in the-orbital-bombardment of taris, from which-point the-player has to make their-escape from the-planet in he ship, the-ebon-hawk.
he appeared in the-first-game.
saul-karath was carth-onasi's-old-mentor who betrayed he to join the-sith.
he appeared in the-first-game where he was killed by revan onboard the-leviathan.
he was voiced by robin-sachs.
queen-talia is a-descendant of the-ancient-sith-lord-freedon-nadd and the-ruler of onderon who is at odds with  queen-talia cousin-vaklu when the-exile comes to the-planet.
queen-talia appeared in the-second-game.
azkul is a-battle-scarred-mercenary who served under malak and later settled on dantooine, attempting to destroy the-local-community of khoonda but was thwarted by the-exile.
azkul appeared in the-second-game.
general-vaklu is the-power-crazed-cousin of  queen-talia who seeks to overthrow azkul young-cousin and take the-royal-throne.
chuundar is a-wookiee-character in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
zaalbar was exiled for attacking chuundar, zaalbar brother, with zaalbar claws after discovering zaalbar brother was selling fellow-wookiees into slavery.
chuundar then later took over fellow-wookiees-tribe and exiled-fellow-wookiees-own-father, the-former-wookiee-chieftain, freyrr.
once the-player comes with zaalbar to kashyyyk in search of a-star-map,  chuundar imprisons zaalbar and tells revan that he must kill their-father, freyrr, in the-shadowlands to free the-wookiee.
if revan chooses to kill freyrr, the-player leaves with the-gratitude of chuundar.
chuundar continues to enslave wookiees and the-player can no longer return to the-wookiee-village.
if revan spares freyyr, revan kills chuundar and the-slavers, frees the-wookiees, frees zaalbar, and leaves with the-gratitude of freyrr, able to return to the-village on kashyyyk at any-time, although the-player is unable to trade on kashyyk any longer after freyyr leads a-wookiee-rebellion that expels the-slavers from the-planet.
an-administrative-protocol-droid that works for czerka on telos in the-outer-rim.
it is possible for the-player to assume control of b4-d4 if the-exile helps the ithorians with the-exile restoration project.
bendak-starkiller is a-mandalorian-neo-crusader who was famous for his-proficiency in the-taris-duelling-ring.
refusing to leave an-opponent alive, bendak retired from the-taris-duelling-ring after the-tarisian-government outlawed death matches some ten years earlier.
during the-jedi-civil-war, his remained on taris, watching matches in the-cantina and hoping for the-day his could return to the-arena for another-death-match with a-worthy-opponent.
in a-dark-side-option, the-player can duel bendak in a-death-match after defeating the-reigning-taris-duelling-champion, twitch.
the-player will receive credits from ajuur for winning the-illegal-death-match and receive bendak's-blaster-pistol, and will receive the-bounty-fee from zax as well.
reception ==
the-characters of the-knights of the-old-republic-series have remained highly popular, often being cited as some of the-best-characters in both-the-star-wars-franchise and video-games in general by both-critics and fans.
ign ranked several-characters from the-series in their-list of top-100-star-wars-characters: darth-revan, darth-malak, hk-47, canderous-ordo, darth-nihilus, bastila-shan, darth-sion, and darth-traya placed 12th, 28th, 33rd, 52nd, 56th, 62nd, 73rd and 81st respectively.
darth-revan and darth-malak jointly ranked fifth-place in a-top-15-list of star-wars-villains by ign's-jesse-schedeen, who remarked that "[v]isually, both-jedi are immediately memorable".
the-members of the-sith-triumvirate, darth-nihilus, darth-sion and darth-traya, came second-place in a-modified-supplementary-list of the-best-star-wars-villains based on reader-requests for characters left out of the-original-top-15-list published by ign.
in a-2020-fan-poll organized by ign for best-star-wars-characters of all-time, revan, darth-malak and bastila-shan placed 30th, 34th-and-69th-place out of 200-characters.
several-characters from the-series dominated gamespot's-2019-list of "15-great-star-wars-characters who came from video-games".
references ==
star-wars:
battlefront is a-series of first--and-third-person-shooter-video-games based on the-star-wars-films.
players take the-role of soldiers in either of two-opposing-armies in different-time-periods of the-star-wars-universe.
a-series of first--and-third-person-shooter-video-games based on the-star-wars-films was launched in 2004 by lucasarts with star-wars: battlefront, developed by pandemic-studios for lucasarts.
a-series of first--and-third-person-shooter-video-games based on the-star-wars-films received positive-reviews and sold well.
in 2005-pandemic developed a-sequel
,-star-wars: battlefront-ii, which was also critically and commercially successful.
the-games were followed by star-wars-battlefront: renegade-squadron (2007) and star-wars-battlefront: elite-squadron (2009) for handheld-consoles and star-wars-battlefront: mobile-squadrons for mobile-devices.
lucasarts made several-attempts to develop a-third-major-battlefront-game but no-projects were released before the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasarts.
subsequently, ea-dice acquired a-license to develop a-new-game, titled star wars battlefront which was released on november 17, 2015.
a-sequel, star-wars-battlefront-ii, was released on november 17, 2017, and was developed by ea-dice, criterion-games, and motive-studios.
gameplay == games in the-battlefront-series normally revolve around two-armies – the-galactic-republic versus the-confederacy of independent-systems or the-galactic-empire versus the-rebel-alliance or first-order versus the-resistance – fighting each other on various-maps.
maps take place in the-star-wars-galaxy, with battlezones varying in theme and size.
across the-battlefield are multiple-"command-posts" (objectives) that act as spawn points, and can be controlled by either-the-player or the-computer.
units can spawn from any-friendly-command-post, and vehicles regularly spawn at  units respective command posts when destroyed.
units can capture neutral-or-hostile-command-posts by approaching units and standing within the-immediate-vicinity for about-30-seconds.
the-time to capture quickens with more-friendly-units within the-capture-zone.
some-vehicles act as mobile-command-posts, and must be destroyed as some-vehicles can not be captured.
on some-maps (such as hoth or endor), certain-structures also act as command-posts that can not be captured.
command-post capturing works differently on certain-campaign-missions as well.
playable-heroes and villains play a-significant-role in changing the-course of battles.
the-objective of most-matches is to eliminate all of the-opponents'-reinforcement-tickets or to capture the-command-points, to slowly chip away at the-opponents'-tickets.
reinforcement-tickets are used whenever a-unit is killed, or when one-faction controls a-majority of the-command-posts on the-map (usually when one-faction only has 2-3).
only-one-objective needs to be completed.
when all-command-posts are captured, the-team with no-command-posts has twenty-seconds to recapture or neutralize an-enemy-command-post.
if the-team with no-command-posts cannot take over a-post in this-time, the-match is over.
certain-campaign-levels and multiplayer have requirements that differ from the-general-game-play, however the-general-structure remains the same.
the-game's-"conquest"-mode is vaguely based on the-battlefield-game-mode of the-same-name.
playable-characters ===
numerous-characters from the-movies, tv-series and other-games have been available to play as, which include: ==
development ==
the-first-console-games of the-series were developed by pandemic-studios, and since 2015, a-second-series of console-battlefront-games has been developed by ea-dice.
battlefront-ii (2017) is the first in the-series to accurately follow the-canon of the-films, while the-games developed by pandemic-studios were relegated to star-wars-legends-non-canonical-status, along with all of the-games in the-series released before november 2015.
star-wars: battlefront (pandemic-studios) == ===
star-wars: battlefront ===
star-wars:
battlefront is the-first-installment in the battlefront series.
battlefront was released on september 21, 2004, with a-mac-port by aspyr released in july 2005.
the-game is available on microsoft-windows, playstation 2, xbox, mac-os, and mobile-phones.
jedi are not playable in the-game without the-help of modified-files unsupported by lucasarts.
other-npcs made playable by similar-files include, but are not limited to, tusken-raiders in the-dune-sea of tatooine, ewoks of endor and gungans on the-naboo-plains.
star-wars: battlefront-ii ===
star-wars:
battlefront-ii is the-second-installment in the-battlefront-series, released in europe on october 31, 2005 – for the-playstation-2,-psp, xbox, and windows – and in north-america one day later.
there are some-significant-differences between battlefront and battlefront ii.
battlefront-ii includes playable-jedi-characters, space-battles, and story-campaigns, as well as star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith-related-content.
the-release-date of battlefront-ii coincided with the-release of revenge of the-sith on dvd.
the-game is now an-xbox-platinum-hits-game, a-sony-greatest-hits-game in north-america, and an-xbox-classics-and-playstation-platinum-game in europe.
battlefront-ii expands upon the-original-game's-single-player-experience with mission-based-objectives drawn from the-first-six-star-wars-films.
battlefront-ii has a-story-based-campaign which revolves around the-501st-legion (aka-"vader's-fist") and  battlefront-ii evolution from a-legion of clone-troopers serving the-republic during the-clone-wars to imperial-stormtroopers.
many-maps from star-wars-battlefront make a-second-appearance, and the-game adds new-locales such as coruscant and utapau.
the-game also introduces "heroes" – playable-characters based on iconic-characters from the-star-wars-films who are much more powerful than regular-soldier (and were also present in the-original-battlefront, but only as npcs that spawned randomly on the-battlefield); the-hero-roster includes luke-skywalker, han-solo, leia-organa, chewbacca, obi-wan-kenobi, yoda, mace-windu, ki-adi-mundi and aayla-secura (as well as kit-fisto, available only on the-xbox-version of the-game via the-xbox-live-patch), whereas the-villain-roster includes darth-vader, darth-sidious, boba-fett, count-dooku, general-grievous, darth-maul, jango-fett, and anakin-skywalker (as well as asajj-ventress, also available only via the-xbox-live-patch).
there are more-modes in this-game, such as conquest, hunt (where players fight as natives on planets against other-natives or certain-troopers in an-army, such as wampas vs. rebels on hoth or tusken-raiders vs. jawas on tatooine, to earn 50-points first), capture the-flag (both with 1-and-2-flags), assault (which, on tatooine only, is also available as heroes vs villains, where one-team plays as the-heroes and the-other-one as the-villains in a-race to rack up points by defeating enemies) and space-battles.
=== canceled sequels === ====
star-wars: battlefront iii ====
on september 29, 2006, computer-and-video-games made an-unconfirmed-claim that free-radical-design was developing the-third-game in the-star-wars: battlefront-series, titled star-wars: battlefront-iii.
in june 2008, kotaku allegedly received information from a-former-lucasarts-employee that star wars:
battlefront-iii was in the-creation-process.
on october 2,  activision-blizzard filed a-classification with the-australian-office of film-and-literature-classification listing star-wars: battlefront-iii for the-nintendo-ds with a-pg-rating (e10+ equivalent) for mild-animated-violence.
however, that same month, free-radical-design announced that free-radical-design lost the-rights to develop star-wars: battlefront-iii; the-game at that-point had been in development for two-years.
several years later, free-radical-design-co-founder-steve-ellis said  battlefront-iii was "pretty much done" in 2008, but that  battlefront-iii was effectively canned when lucasarts could not commit to "spend big" on marketing  battlefront-iii.
however, gamespot quoted an-unnamed-lucasarts-employee involved with the-project who said free-radical could not devote sufficient-resources to the-game and regularly missed deadlines.
a-former-free-radical-design-employee said some of the-technology free-radical developed for the-game, specifically-the-contiguous-game-environment from planet-surface into space, "is dying with us".
during and after the-game's-development, screenshots, and gameplay-footage became accessible to the-public.
in december 2008, star-wars-character renders bearing a-battlefront-iii-watermark surfaced from a-laid-off-free-radical-employee.
the following month, gameplay-footage was leaked from a november 2008 free-radical in-house showing of battlefront-iii-footage.
gameplay-footage was pulled from ign after lucasarts demanded lucasarts removal.
on april 1, 2012, a-user on the-game-journalist-website betagames discovered star-wars-models and textures buried in resident-evil:
operation-raccoon-city's-archives; pc-gamer's-tom-senior speculated that these could have been from battlefront-iii.
also in april 2012, past to present revealed pre-alpha-footage of free-radical-design's-battlefront-iii.
youtube-videos showing the-game's-rough-state received media-attention from outlets such as joystiq, kotaku, and shacknews.
on january 20, 2016, a-leaked-build of the-game surfaced on reddit.
it is currently playable using an-xbox-360-development-kits and modified xbox-360-consoles via a-program called "rgloader".
star-wars:
battlefront-online ====
star-wars:
battlefront-online was rumored to be the-next-installment in the-series.
on january 28, 2010, kotaku reported that socom-developer-slant-six-games was working with lucasarts to develop an-online-only-battlefront-title due in 2011.
the-game was said to be released for the xbox 360 and playstation 3.
the-game was also stated that the-game may have been the-source of the-star-wars: battlefront 3 concept art renders.
however, the-game has been canceled after the-studio was unable to meet the-game 2010 release deadline.
star-wars:
first-assault and version two ====
star-wars:
first-assault was to be a-downloadable-multiplayer-shooter for xbox-live-arcade.
digital-trends speculated that star-wars:  first-assault might help lucasarts recover some of lucasarts previous investment in battlefront-iii and other-projects in the-franchise.
speaking to kotaku an-anonymous-insider noted that the-game was to be "step zero" towards a-third-battlefront-game.
when footage of the-game was leaked onto youtube-tech-site technobuffalo noted that the-gameplay very closely resembled that of the-call of duty-franchise.
alongside first-assault, lucasarts was also working on a-separate-game titled "version 2", which was, reportedly, a-code-name for battlefront 3.
star-wars-battlefront-iv ====
in 2018, concept-art surfaced of a-canceled-battlefront-iv, rather than attempting to fit within the-previous-games-and-films'-continuity, concept-art showed the-game was meant to focus on an-alternate-reality where obi-wan-kenobi and luke-skywalker fell to the-dark-side, instead of anakin-skywalker.
handheld and mobile only games === ====
star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron ====
star-wars-battlefront:
renegade-squadron
==== is a-handheld-game released in north-america on october 9, 2007 and in europe three days later.
a-handheld-game released in north-america on october 9, 2007 was released only for the-playstation-portable.
renegade-squadron is also available in a-bundle-pack with the-then-new-white-psp-redesign featuring darth-vader on the-back.
aside from new-heroes and vehicles, such as the-millennium-falcon, a-new-feature is the-ability to create a-character, allowing the-player to adjust the-character's-features such as weapon, appearance, and speed.
however, the-character will be vulnerable due to the-lacking of certain-aspects that will be replaced by others.
for example, the-character may be fast but weak or have good-weapons but no-stamina and speed.
before the-game's-release, lucasarts had stated that over-one-million-different-customizable-options would be present.
another-new-feature allows players to enter asteroid-bases on some-space-maps.
commander-col-serra describes the-forming of renegade-squadron in the-beginning-cutscene of campaign.
then the-player starts a-series of missions ranging in objectives while including cut-scenes between each-mission.
the-final-mission includes the-battle of endor, in which the-objectives are similar to the-footage of return of the-jedi.
star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron ====
star-wars-battlefront:
elite-squadron ==== was released on november 3, 2009 for the-playstation-portable and the-nintendo-ds.
this marks the-third-battlefront-game on the-playstation-portable and the first on a-nintendo-console.
the-game was originally discovered through  the-game esrb rating on the-official-esrb-website which has since been taken down.
the-game follows in the-same-vein as  the-game predecessors with space, land and new-air-battles.
elite-squadron is most notable for featuring simultaneous-space-and-ground-battles in instant-action, and is the-only-game in the-series with this-feature.
players usually play in a-third-person-perspective, but in the-psp-version, players can also switch to a-strategy-based-mode where players may build troops and upgrade armies.
star-wars-battlefront:
mobile-squadrons ====
star-wars-battlefront:
mobile-squadrons ===
is a-mobile-game developed by thq-wireless.
mobile-squadrons ==== was released on april 2, 2009.
the-game features a-persistent-online-community, and has three-character-classes.
the-gameplay is a-first-person-perspective-shooter that can use the-touch-features of a-phone, although the-player has no-control over movement.
star-wars-battlefront (ea-dice) == ===
star-wars-battlefront (2015) ===
at an-electronic-entertainment-expo (e3)-press-conference on june 10, 2013, dice, unveiled a-teaser-trailer for a-new-star-wars: battlefront-game, built on the-frostbite-3-engine.
a-teaser-trailer for a-new-star-wars: battlefront-game, built on the-frostbite-3-engine showed a-first-person-view of the-battle of hoth, including a-crashing-snowspeeder and the-foot of an-at-at.
dice showed additional-development-footage at the-2014-e3-conference.
the-game's-title was eventually announced as star-wars-battlefront.
in april 2015, ea announced a-release-date of november 17, 2015  at star-wars-celebration.
the-game is a-reboot of the-series, focusing on capturing the-look of the-films.
at launch, four-planets were confirmed --hoth, tatooine, endor, and sullust.
unlike its-predecessors, star-wars-battlefront does not feature the-clone-wars-era found in the-films, nor does its-feature-content from the force awakens; as a-result, the-hero-and-villain-roster is also limited, at launch including only-luke-skywalker, han-solo, leia-organa, darth-vader, emperor-palpatine, and boba-fett.
free-downloadable-content (dlc) for the-game was released in december 2015, featuring the-planet of jakku with two-new-maps and a-new-multiplayer-game-mode.
the-game also features both-first-and-third-person-gameplay-perspectives, similar to  the-game predecessors.
a-gameplay-trailer involving the-hoth-battle debuted at e3 on june 15, 2015.
the-game features a-pseudo-campaign — a-cooperative-experience allowing the-player to experience gameplay with one-or-two-players and computer-controlled-allies and opponents.
outer-rim" is the-first-dlc-pack for  the-game and was released on march 22, 2016.
outer-rim" adds new-heroes nien-nunb and greedo to
the-game, four-new-maps set in jabba the-hutt's-palace (palace-garage and jabba's palace) on tatooine and a-factory-area on sullust (sorosuub-refinery and sorosuub-pipelines), and a-new-mode called "extraction".
the-dlc is available for free to all-players who have purchased the-game's-season-pass, otherwise costing $10.
the-second-expansion-pack is titled "bespin" and allows players to fight in the-setting of cloud-city, released in september 2016.
the-expansion added more-maps along with an-additional-game-mode titled sabotage and new heroes lando calrissian and dengar.
the-third-expansion-pack, titled "death star", was released in september 2016 as well and added the-long-awaited-death-star to the-game, along with new-heroes-chewbacca and bossk.
the-fourth-and-final-dlc-pack was released on december 6, 2016.
it is based on characters and locations from the-film rogue-one, and includes jyn-erso and orson-krennic as new-playable-heroes, and a-new-game-mode set both above and on the-planet scarif.
star-wars-battlefront-ii
(2017) ===
blake-jorgensen of electronic-arts mentioned a-sequel in november 2016, and star-wars-battlefront-ii was announced in march 2017.
the-game was released on november 17, 2017.
since the-restructuring of the-star-wars-canon, battlefront is the-first-game with a-storyline that is considered canonical to the-film-series.
star-wars-battlefront-ii features both-single-player-and-multiplayer-game-modes, a-customizable-character-class-system, and content based on all-star-wars-movies up to star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (with content for the-other-movies, as well as television-series being added later on via free-dlc).
a-celebration-edition was released in december 2019.
dice announced that scarif from rogue-one would be the-last-content-update released for the-game.
=== canceled spin-off ===
in 2019, ea was in the-process of developing a-game-code-named-viking, designed as a-spin-off of the-battlefront-series with open-world-elements.
the-game was originally planned for release in fall 2020, coinciding with the-next-generation of video-game-consoles, but was canceled in late 2019.
cultural-impact ==
fan-made sequel-games === ====
galaxy in turmoil ===
on january 25, 2016, frontwire-studios began an-attempt to produce an-unofficial-battlefront-installment called galaxy in turmoil.
the-fan made game was in production using unreal-engine 4 and was based on the-canceled-star-wars: battlefront-iii by free-radical-design.
although early-versions of the-game contained assets from  free-radical-design, assets soon became "place-holders" as the-full-game planned to be released using assets and music made from the-ground up.
on june 4, 2016, galaxy in turmoil gained a-distribution-deal through valve and was planned to be released for free on steam which generated a-fair-amount of attention.
on june 22, 2016, lucasfilm requested the-production of galaxy in turmoil in turmoil be halted.
on july 31, 2016, frontwire-studios announced the-cancellation of the-game was due to the-"possibility of galaxy in turmoil taking away attention from electronic-arts's-battlefront-franchise".
proposals of galaxy in turmoil falling under the-paywall of electronic-arts, and ideas of lucasfilm giving frontwire-studios a-star-wars-license were both rejected due to an-agreement between electronic-arts and lucasfilm.
although frontwire-studios may have fallen within fair-use-laws, legal-conflict was avoided and the-project was canceled.
there is a-playable-alpha that contains assets from free-radical-design that was released to the-public then removed early within galaxy in turmoil's-lifetime.
galaxy in turmoil is now planned to be redeveloped as a-brand-new-cyberpunk-themed-ip without any-star-wars-references, but still with battlefront-iii-inspired-mechanics including space-to-ground battles.
see also ==
list of star-wars-video-games ==
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-captain-phasma is a-fictional-character in the-star-wars-franchise, portrayed by english-actress-gwendoline-christie.
introduced in star-wars: the-force awakens (2015), the-first-film in the star-wars sequel trilogy ,
official-website-captain-phasma is the-commander of the-first-order's-force of stormtroopers.
english-actress-gwendoline-christie returned to the-role in the next of the-trilogy's-films, star wars: the-last-jedi (2017), and in the-animated-television-series star-wars-resistance (2018) and several-video-games.
the-character also made an-additional-appearance in before the-awakening, an anthology book set before the-events of the force awakens.
j.-j.-abrams created phasma from an-armor-design originally developed for kylo-ren and named her after the-1979-horror-film phantasm.
the-character was originally conceived as male.
phasma appeared prominently in promotion and marketing for the force awakens, but  the-character's-ultimately-minor-role in the-1979-horror-film
phantasm was the-subject of criticism, a-complaint repeated for her-appearance in the-last-jedi.
nonetheless, merchandise featuring  the-character found success, and her-figure was the-best-selling of all-the-force
awakens action-figures on amazon.co.uk.
concept and creation ==
the-character's-creation was inspired by a-rejected-design for kylo-ren.
costume-designer-michael-kaplan came up with the-concept of kylo being "the-lord of the-stormtroopers, in bright-shining-silver-armor".
kaplan had a-strong-image in  kaplan head of what this-concept should look like, which concept
artist-dermot-power turned into an-illustration.
this-image, however, was immediately rejected by director-j.-j.-abrams.
later, producer-kathleen-kennedy found the-design, reacting positively and calling the-design "fantastic".
director-j.-j.-abrams then used the-design to create a-new-character, phasma.
he named phasma after the-1979-horror-film phantasm because phantasm armor reminded kaplan of the-1979-horror-film phantasm's spheres.
kaplan intended for the-visuals of the-first-order to contrast with that of the-resistance, appearing in colors like "black, teal blue, and steel gray", with stormtroopers being updated to be more simplified and modernized.
kaplan designed the-character believing it would be "extremely cool" to have a-silver-armored-character in the-1979-horror-film phantasm.
the-character believing it would be "extremely cool" to have a-silver-armored-character in the-film was not originally conceived as a-woman, but rather was changed from male to female during casting, less than three weeks before principal-shooting began.
phasma thereby became the second on-screen female star wars villain, after zam-wesell.
with captain-phasma, the-filmmakers wished to "push the-boundaries" of traditional-roles for female-characters.
actress-gwendoline-christie, who had previously played brienne of tarth in game of thrones, was first officially confirmed as captain-phasma in a-vanity-fair-spread released may 4, 2015, following its-leak.
christie fought heavily to appear in the-film, continually insisting christie agent get christie a-part in her-agent.
christie was not aware that the-character was originally a-man.
christie took inspiration from christie armor—"it's very high-functioning, it's very imposing
and it's not malleable at all"—in how to play the-character.
in playing phasma, christie felt encouraged to experiment more with the-gesture of a-character.
christie felt initial-costume, used in the force awakens, had to be created over a-period of "four-or-five-days"; co-costume-designer-dave-crossman described co-costume-designer-dave-crossman physical creation as "a-complete-panic".
it took christie roughly-forty-five-minutes to put on.
a-new-suit was created for the-last-jedi, with various-tweaks.
its-helmet was re-chromed, the-fit was altered, and the-armor was made "much cleaner and shinier."
character ==
the-commander of the-first-order's-stormtroopers, captain-phasma is described as a-"tough-veteran-commander" and one of a-"commanding-triumvirate" of the-first-order alongside kylo-ren and general-hux.
christie compared captain-phasma to boba-fett in the-sense of being a-character who, while not "at the-forefront of the-action all-the-time", still has "a-lot of impact".
the-actress called the-character "a-malevolent-force" who takes pleasure in  the-actress cruelty, something
the-actress attributed to a-perceived-difficult-journey to becoming the-only-female-stormtrooper of rank.
to contrast with other-stormtroopers in the-franchise, christie portrayed phasma with both-some-femininity and sassiness.
glen-robert-gill, writing for bright-lights-film-journal, saw phasma as "the-demonic-or-negative-emanation of the-maidenly-anima".
phasma is depicted wearing salvaged-chromium-armor, which in the-force-awakens'-visual-dictionary is established as coming from a-naboo-yacht once owned by palpatine.
it is said to serve "primarily as a-symbol of past-power".
christie recognised the-character's-helmet as both being futuristic and having medieval-elements.
chris-laverty, creator of costume-analysis-site-clothes on film, called her-armor "probably-the-most-regal-costume" in the-force awakens, and noted her-armor "probably-the-most-regal-costume" in the-force awakens as a-reflection of her-status.
he also felt her-cloak, "elegantly slung over one-shoulder", was a-method of humanizing the-character.
in-universe, her-cloak is the-"traditional-cape of first-order-command".
gill-armor called to mind-mirrors, symbols of "self-reflection and self-examination", the-feelings gill brings in finn when gill inadvertently helps inspire him to defect.
appearances == ===
film === ====
the-force awakens (2015) ====
the-second-trailer for the-2015-film star-wars:
the force awakens introduced the-character.
in the-2015-film star-wars, phasma begins engaged in an-attack at tuanul, a-settlement-village on the-desert-planet jakku, in search of a-galaxy-map that leads to the-last-jedi, luke-skywalker.
after the-battle is won, phasma and the-other-stormtroopers execute the-remaining-villagers.
back on the-resurgent-class-star-destroyer finalizer, she meets with stormtrooper-fn-2187, and reprimands him for having removed him helmet without permission.
later-flees and frees poe-dameron (who renames him finn).
phasma is present when finn's-defection is discovered; phasma mentions that finn had never committed any-infractions in the-past.
finally, when finn, han-solo, and chewbacca infiltrate starkiller-base, finn, han-solo, and chewbacca take phasma-hostage and pressure phasma to deactivate the-base's-shields, intending to drop phasma in the-trash-compactor.
the-last-jedi (2017) ====
phasma appears in star-wars:
the-last-jedi when finn, mechanic-rose-tico, and computer-hacker-dj infiltrate the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy, a-37.5-miles (60.4-km)-wide-flagship, in an-attempt to disable the-ship's-tracking-device.
the-last-jedi when finn, mechanic-rose-tico, and computer-hacker-dj infiltrate the-mega-class-star-dreadnought-supremacy, a-37.5-miles (60.4-km)-wide-flagship, in an-attempt to disable the-ship's-tracking-device are captured and brought before phasma-and-phasma-stormtroopers.
phasma taunts finn, and orders  phasma execution with rose in a-"slow-and-painful"-way.
before this can occur, vice-admiral-holdo plummets the-mc85-star-cruiser-raddus, vice-admiral-holdo two-mile-long cruiser, into the-first-order-fleet at lightspeed.
in the-ensuing-chaos, phasma and finn fight.
at first, phasma gets the-upper-hand, knocking finn into a-pit.
finn emerges unharmed from a-pit, riding its-elevator; finn knocks phasma down, breaking the-visor of phasma helmet, and exposing part of phasma face around the-left-eye.
the-turf crumbles beneath phasma, and phasma falls into the-flames.
in a-deleted-scene, the-battle with phasma-and-phasma-fate are significantly different: phasma and four-stormtroopers manage to surround finn, who taunts phasma about phasma compliance to phasma demands in the force awakens.
before four-stormtroopers can turn on phasma, phasma kills all of them and then prepares to attack finn, but phasma manages to cut phasma hand off and blasts phasma into the-ship's-wreckage.
the-last-jedi-director rian-johnson said that phasma's-limited-supporting-role in the-film was due to time-constraints and an-already-large-cast of characters, and indicated that there were no-other-plans for phasma in the-films.
though phasma's-fate was left unknown and the-possibility of phasma returning in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker was hinted, john-boyega confirmed at the-episode-ix-panel during celebration-chicago that phasma indeed died in the-last-jedi, officially confirming john-boyega death.
television ===
phasma appears in the-2018-animated-series star-wars-resistance, voiced by gwendoline-christie.
literature ===
before the-awakening, a-prequel-anthology, features the-character in a-short-story centered around finn.
in the-character, finn monitors finn's performance in combat-simulation and, although praising his-skill, finn criticizes his-rescuing of a-weaker-soldier.
additionally, phasma is featured in both-the-adult-and-junior-novelizations of the force awakens.
in the-lead-up to the-last-jedi's-release, phasma's-backstory was explored in star-wars: phasma, a-novel by delilah-s.-dawson.
though phasma's-origins and character are discussed, the-novel is not told from phasma's-perspective.
comics ====
a-four-part-comic-miniseries, star-wars: captain-phasma, was announced in april 2017 as part of the-journey to star-wars:
the-last-jedi-initiative.
the-series was written by kelly-thompson with art by marco-checchetto, and published by marvel-comics between september 6 and october 18, 2017.
it explains phasma's-escape from starkiller-base during the-climax of the force awakens, and subsequent-events.
she pursues loose-ends while framing lieutenant-sol-rivas for lowering the-shields to the-first-order's-superweapon.
she-pursuit takes she to the-planet-luprora after she requisitions a-tie-fighter, the-planet-luprora pilot, and an-astromech-droid.
in a-flashback in issue #3, phasma mentions siv, a-character from the 2017 novel phasma.
reviewing for ign, jesse-schedeen wrote that thompson's-"efficient-approach to storytelling, coupled with the-gorgeous-tag-team-combo that is marco-checchetto and andres-mossa, makes this-a-star-wars-comic every-phasma-fan should read."
other-media ===
the-lego-star-wars-version of phasma also appears in the-2016-short-form-animated-series lego-star-wars: the-resistance rises.
she is also a-playable-character and boss in the-lego-video-game-adaptation of the force awakens.
merchandise ===
as part of the-lead-up to the-film, disney released a-wave of star-wars-toys on 2015's-"force friday".
one-such-toy was a-phasma-voice-changing-mask, which contained the-first-dialogue heard by the-public.
other-items included a-costume for children as well as action-figures.
reception ==
phasma received attention before release.
before phasma-name was confirmed, phasma had been dubbed "the chrometrooper" by fans.
the-trademarking of "captain-phasma" led to speculation that it was the-name of christie's-rumored-character, said to be an-imperial-officer pursuing finn.
phasma had been the-name of a-character in one-star-wars-fanfic, tarkin's-fist, leading to movieweb
wondering if it was an-intentional-homage.
ign's "keepin' it-reel" podcast discussed the-possibility of phasma being "the-next-breakout-baddie" in the-vein of boba-fett and darth-maul.
they responded positively to the-character's-name, despite some-initial-misgivings, for fitting in with the franchise's flash gordon roots.
they also praised her-armor-design, stating that character-design had been important in the-success of boba-fett and maul.
they similarly had high-hopes for christie's-acting.
during the-lead-up to the-film, phasma became a fan favorite.
polygon's-susana-polo considered the-force awakens a-great-achievement for hollywood for the-force diversity regardless of the-force quality, though polygon's-susana-polo used phasma as an-example of how the-film was not perfect, noting rumors of phasma's minor role despite polygon's-susana-polo being the first on-screen female stormtrooper.
upon the-force-awakens'-release, criticism fell on the-character's-minimal-role in the-film.
the-telegraph's-jonathan-mcaloon called the-telegraph's-jonathan-mcaloon "one-criticism" of the-force awakens the-underuse of phasma, and wondered if polygon's-susana-polo-face would ever be revealed in the-films.
jason-guerrasio of business-insider echoed the-sentiment, noting jason-guerrasio of business-insider lack of screen-time despite jason-guerrasio of business-insider great potential.
scott-meslow, writing for the-week, criticized the-film's-lack of nuance in the-film-villains, calling her "a total cipher" in the-film despite her-heavy-appearance in the-film promotion.
he pointed to her-appearance in before the-awakening as a-way to expand her-character, noting her-cold-yet-logical-pragmatism in it.
jesse-schedeen of ign called phasma "something of a-disappointment in the force awakens", negatively contrasting her against fett in that "even fett had the-distinction of outsmarting han-solo before meeting an-ignominious-end".
jesse-schedeen of ign hoped phasma would be revisited in marvel's-star-wars-comics, to help flesh out jesse-schedeen of ign character and build jesse-schedeen of ign into a-better-villain.
max-nicholson, writing for collider, noted the-amount of hype for the-character, as well as her-minimal-role in the-story.
nicholson suggested that hux and phasma should have been merged into one-character, as hux and phasma were too similar, or phasma should have been given the-melee-fight-scene given to a-trooper nicknamed "tr-8r" by fans.
bill-keveney of usa today negatively compared phasma's-skill as a-warrior to christie's-character brienne of tarth from game of thrones.
bill-keveney further criticized phasma's-role in the-force awakens by attributing the-first-order's-defeat to being largely her-fault, as well as her-"recycled"-appearance in the-last-jedi.
merchandise featuring the-character proved popular.
david-betancourt of the-washington-post called phasma's-role in the-film "little more than a-shiny-new-prop", viewing david-betancourt of the-washington-post as a-victim of the-film's need to introduce all the-film new-characters, yet noted the-popularity and rarity of the-merchandise surrounding the-character.
captain-phasma's-figure was the-bestselling of the-force-awakens'-action-figures on amazon.co.uk.
references == ==
external-links ==
captain-phasma in the-starwars.com-databank-phasma on wookieepedia, a star wars wiki captain-phasma on imdb-star-wars:
the force awakens is the-novelization of the-2015-film of the-same-name.
the-author, alan-dean-foster, also wrote star-wars: from the-adventures of luke-skywalker, the-1976-novelization of the first star-wars film.
development ==
asked to write the-novelization by shelly-shapiro of del-rey-books, foster was given access to the-screenplay of the-first-star-wars-film, along with stills from the-film of characters and sets.
foster wanted to develop a-romance between rey and finn, which  foster thought was implied in the-film.
foster later stated, "i expected to see that developed further in episode viii.
foster also expressed  foster dissatisfaction with the-film, saying that the-film prompted  foster to write a-treatment for episode-ix, "attempting in that-storyline to explain a-lot of the-really-silly-things that happened in episode-viii.
however,  foster admitted that  foster "never expected disney to do anything with [it].
differences between the-novel and the-film ==
the-novelization includes additional-scenes and dialogue.
these include:
a-prologue featuring an-excerpt from the-"journal of the-whills", a-fictional-journal first mentioned in foster's-first-star-wars-novelization.
early in the-novel, a-sequence with leia reveals the-origin of main-factions in the-film: the-resistance, the-new-republic and the-first-order.
a-section revealing how poe-dameron escapes from the-crashed-tie-fighter and leaves jakku.
a-sequence where rey and chewbacca encounter unkar-plutt on takodana.
publication-history ==
to avoid spoilers caused by the-book being released before the-movie, the-hardcover-release was delayed until january 5, 2016.
the-book being released before the-movie was released on december 18, 2015.
the-book being released before the-movie was a-#1-new-york-times-best-seller.
references ==
footnotes-citations
this is an-incomplete-list of characters from the-star-wars expanded universe, now rebranded star-wars-legends.
the-accompanying-works were declared non-canon to the-star-wars-franchise by lucasfilm in 2014.this-list applies only to characters who completely appear in legends-media, and who therefore do not exist in the-canon-continuity.
for characters belonging to the-canon-continuity, see list of star-wars-characters.
a-droid working with jerec in star-wars-jedi-knight: dark-forces-ii.
dark-side-entity , abeloth began as a-mortal-woman who came across the-immortal-force-entities, the-ones, on a-mortal-woman who came across the-immortal-force-entities, the-ones mysterious home world.
taking on the-mantle of the-mother, abeloth helped the-father keep the-peace between abeloth warring son and daughter for many-years.
however, fearing daughter own mortality, daughter bathed in the-pool of knowledge and drank from the-font of power, in hopes of remaining with daughter immortal family.
the-result was that she became the-dark-side-entity abeloth.
working with the-insectoid-killik-race, the-ones worked together to construct centerpoint-station, which the-ones used to imprison abeloth on the-ones planet, surrounding abeloth with a-cluster of black-holes, later known as the-maw.
following this-abeloth's-family relocated to the-mysterious-planet-mortis, leaving the-mysterious-planet-mortis to the-mysterious-planet-mortis lonely prison.
millennia later, following the-actions of the-sith-lord-darth-caedus, the-jedi (led by jedi-grand-master-luke-skywalker) launched an-attack on centerpoint and destroyed the-ancient-space-station.
this resulted in the-eventual-destruction of sinkhole-station, allowing abeloth to finally leave her-lonely-prison.
using her-dark-side-powers, abeloth possessed the-charismatic-senator-rokari-kem, whom her used to assume control of the-galactic-federation of free-alliances, as well as the-lost-tribe of the-sith (after her-murder of sith-grand-lord-darish-vol).
her was eventually destroyed by the-combined-efforts of skywalker and skywalker sith counterpart, darth-krayt, leader of the-one-sith.
king-adas-king of korriban during the-time of the-first-sith-empire.
king-adas-king of korriban during the-time of the-first-sith-empire-reign lasted nearly three hundred years, and king-adas-king of korriban during the-time of the-first-sith-empire wielded two-massive-axes.
darth-andeddu
the-self-styled-"immortal-god-king of prakith" who reigned as dark-lord of the-sith during the-hundred-year-darkness.
the-self-styled-"immortal-god-king of prakith" who reigned as dark-lord of the-sith during the-hundred-year-darkness left behind a-holocron that supposedly held the-secret to immortality.
the-self-styled-"immortal-god-king of prakith" who reigned as dark-lord of the-sith during the-hundred-year-darkness did appear in star-wars-canon
but it was a-very-brief-mention.
one of the-legions of sith-troopers in the-canon-film star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker was named after  the-rise of skywalker.
a-yuuzhan-vong-character prominent throughout the-new-jedi-order-series of novels, published from 1999 to 2003.
a-yuuzhan-vong-character prominent throughout the-new-jedi-order-series of novels, published from 1999 to 2003 was responsible for half of the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion in the-star-wars-galaxy.
in the-latter-half of the-new-jedi-order, a-yuuzhan-vong-character prominent throughout the-new-jedi-order series of novels, published from 1999 to 2003 became an-antihero as a-yuuzhan-vong-character prominent throughout the-new-jedi-order series of novels, published from 1999 to 2003 led a-heretical-movement among a-yuuzhan-vong-character
prominent throughout the-new-jedi-order-series of novels, published from 1999 to 2003 people to take down his-people-ruler, supreme-overlord-shimrra.
by the-series's-end, having seen to the-deaths of shimrra-and-shimrra-puppet-master-onimi, nom-anor chose death over living in the-postwar-galaxy.
bail-antilles
an-alderaanian-senator; as an-alderaanian-senator is the-father of breha-antilles, wife to bail organa, bail-antilles is the-adoptive-grandfather of princess leia organa.
arcann the-son of valkorion, brother to thexan and vaylin, and temporary-ruler of the-eternal-throne in the-star-wars: the-old-republic-video-game.
seti-ashgad
a-hyperdrive-engineer working for the-incom-corporation who also served in the-galactic-senate during the-days of the-clone-wars.
a-hyperdrive-engineer working for the-incom-corporation who also served in the-galactic-senate during the-days of the-clone-wars was known as "the-golden-tempter", and was also known for a-hyperdrive-engineer working for the-incom-corporation who also served in the-galactic-senate during the-days of the-clone-wars extreme ambition and wanted to replace palpatine as supreme-chancellor.
atris — voiced by elizabeth-rider-a-jedi-council-member who along with her-colleagues exiled meetra-surik, supposedly because her followed revan to war.
she established a-jedi-academy on telos and is served by a-retinue of echani-handmaiden-warriors in knights of the-old-republic-ii – the-sith-lords.
tavion-axmis-antagonist in star-wars-jedi-knight: a-jedi-academy on telos.
apprentice of kadann who served the-secret-order of the-empire.
azrakel was known for  apprentice of kadann who served the-secret-order of the-empire disturbing-and-sadistic-penchant for killing.
following the-death of emperor-palpatine, emperor-palpatine becomes a mercenary operating in the-outer-rim.
azzameen-family-protagonists in the-video-game
star-wars: x-wing-alliance, including player-character-ace and his-father and the-family-patriarch tomaas.
the-administrative-droid that works for czerka on telos in the-outer-rim.
it is possible to control b4-d4 in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords while helping the-ithorians with their-restoration-project.
darth-bandon-apprentice of darth-malak.
killed by revan during the-events of knights of the-old-republic.
bao-dur — voiced by roger-g.-smith
a-zabrak-technician from iridonia who served under meetra-surik during the-mandalorian-wars.
a-zabrak-technician from iridonia who served under meetra-surik during the-mandalorian-wars was the-inventor of the-mass-shadow-generator which caused the-cataclysmic-events in malachor-v, and later reunites with surik as a-playable-companion in knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords.
garm-bel-iblis
a-republic-senator and initial-member of the-rebel-alliance.
jolee-bindo
a-former-member of the-jedi-order and playable-character in both-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
a-known-companion of revan who aided him in him quest to find and destroy the-star-forge.
deliah-blue
a-companion of cade-skywalker and jariah-syn during the-sith-imperial-war in the-legacy-comic-series.
blue-max-droid that is part of han-solo's-crew in the-han-solo-adventures by brian-daley.
blue-max-droid that is part of han-solo's-crew in the-han-solo-adventures by brian daleyhan solothe-han-solo-adventures brian daley.
renamed to zollux for uk-imprints.
empatojayos-brand-ancient-jedi, introduced in the-star-wars-dark-empire-comic-series, who sacrifices empatojayos-brand-ancient-jedi, introduced in the-star-wars-dark-empire-comic-series, who sacrifices himself to help destroy the-soul of the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine to help destroy the-soul of the-resurrected-emperor-palpatine.
malcor-brashin — voiced by david-warner-grand-general in the-imperial-army who was heavily involved in the-battles of tatooine and yavin 4.
he was prominently featured in star-wars: force-commander.
senator-bana-breemu — portrayed by bai-ling-representative of the-humbarine-sector in the-galactic-senate during the-galactic-republic.
shira-brie
an-imperial-intelligence-operative who infiltrated the-rebel-alliance.
after nearly being killed, brie underwent extensive-cybernetic-implants to become lumiya.
noa-briqualon — portrayed by wilford-brimley
marooned on endor in ewoks:
the-battle for endor.
maris-brood — portrayed by adrienne-wilkinson
jedi in the-force-unleashed who later turns to the-dark-side.
starkiller spares starkiller life on felucia.
initially a normal 3px-series protocol droid, he became, in 33-bby, darth-maul's-reprogrammed-assassin-droid, but, with darth-maul's-apparent-death in 32-bby, along with the-sith-shuttle-scimitar, he was confiscated by supreme-chancellor-palpatine.
darth-caedus-sith-lord born as "jacen-solo", the-oldest-son of han-solo and leia-organa-solo and jaina-solo's-twin-brother.
jacen was a-hero of the-yuuzhan-vong-war, having personally ended jacen by killing their-true-supreme-overlord onimi, but years later became the-evil-sith-lord-caedus.
jacen actions as a-sith during the-second-galactic-civil-war forced jacen-sister, jaina, to kill jacen.
yomin-carr
a-yuuzhan-vong-character who served as one of the-antagonists in the-first-novel of the-new-jedi-order-series, vector-prime.
a yuuzhan vong character who served as one of the-antagonists in the-first-novel of the-new-jedi-order-series, vector-prime was killed in combat by mara-jade-skywalker.
cb-99-protocol-droid-jabba the-hutt used to keep cb-99-protocol-droid-jabba the-hutt will.
after his-death shortly before the-battle of endor, zorba the-hutt, jabba's-father, reclaimed jabba's-will and everything he owned through the-droid.
he was first featured in the-novel-zorba the-hutt's-revenge.
jorus-c'baoth-jedi-master of the-galactic-republic who masterminded and led project-outbound-flight, an-effort to explore beyond the-galaxy.
the-massive-vessel used for this-attempt was attacked by future-imperial-grand-admiral-thrawn, whom c'baoth attempted to murder after insanity drove him to the-dark-side.
him was stopped and killed by a-jedi-padawan aboard
the-massive-vessel used for this-attempt; emperor-palpatine subsequently had emperor-palpatine cloned.
joruus-c'baoth-insane-clone of jedi-master-jorus-c'baoth and in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy.
tycho-celchu — voiced by timothy-omundson (rogue squadron iii: rebel-strike) and jess-harnell (jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast)
tie-fighter-pilot who defected to the-rebel-alliance and became a-member of rogue-squadron, and later became a-general of the-new-republic.
tie-fighter-pilot who defected to the-rebel-alliance and became a-member of rogue-squadron, and later became a-general of the-new-republic is a-central-character in michael-a.-stackpole's-x-wing-series of books.
charal-force-wielding-nightsister-antagonist in battle for endor.
yuuzhan-vong-warmaster who succeeded tsavong-lah.
surrendered on behalf of the-yuuzhan-vong after shimrra and onimi's-deaths, ending the-conflict.
choka-a-yuuzhan-vong-warrior who appeared in edge of victory ii:
rebirth, a-novel in the-new-jedi-order; killed in a-duel to the-death by anakin-solo.
cilghal-mon-calamari-jedi-master and member of the-jedi-council who originally appeared as a-senator of dac in the-jedi-academy-trilogy with an-aptitude for science and healing; niece of gial-ackbar.
darth-cognus-sith-lord trained by darth-bane and darth-zannah.
she would later train darth-millennial.
general-airen cracken-rebel and new-republic intelligence-officer.
west-end-games-star-wars-roleplaying-supplements sometimes were published as "cracken's"-guides to  general-airen cracken-rebel and new-republic-intelligence-officer-topic.
cradossk the-father of bossk who leads the-bounty-hunters'-guild.
his-death at the-hands of bossk, as depicted in the-novel the-mandalorian-armor, splits the-bounty-hunters'-guild into the-guild-reform-committee and the-true-guild.
admiral-natasi-daala-antagonist introduced in the-jedi-academy-trilogy, returning in darksaber, planet of twilight, and death-star.
in the-legacy of the-force-series, daala becomes the-chief of state of the-galactic-federation of free-alliances.
a-yuuzhan-vong-character who served as one of the-antagonists in the first of the-new-jedi-order-novels, vector-prime.
a-yuuzhan-vong-character who served as one of the-antagonists in the first of the-new-jedi-order-novels, vector-prime was killed when the-world of helska-iv, which a-yuuzhan-vong-character who served as one of the-antagonists in the first of the-new-jedi-order-novels, vector-prime was on, exploded because of the-actions of the-new-republic.
joclad-danva human-jedi-knight from attack of the-clones.
uses a-green-lightsaber in the-battle of geonosis, where he is killed.
general-oro-dassyne — voiced by terrence-carson-a-separatist-general and an-agent of the-corporate-alliance who commanded the-cis'-forces on bomis-koori-iv.
gizor-delso
a-geonosian-separatist who survived darth-vader's-slaughter of the-remaining-separatist-leaders and created darth-vader's-own-droid-army.
he had plans to make a-new-battle-droid until imperial-stormtroopers of the-501st
legion raided legion factory on mustafar and destroyed legion plans.
gizor never made it off the-planet.
desann — voiced by mark-klastorin-dark-jedi-antagonist in star-wars-jedi-knight-ii:
jedi-outcast.
darth-desolous
a-male-pau'an-dark-lord of the-sith.
once a-revered-jedi-master, once a-revered-jedi-master loses once a-revered-jedi-master proper identity after falling to the-dark-side of the-force.
appears in the-video-game
star-wars:
the-force unleashed.
dewlanna-female-wookiee who served on garris-shrike's-crew, and later became a-surrogate-mother to han-solo.
niordi-bounty-hunter who underwent cybernetic-enhancement to have hunter-head turned into a-laser-cannon.
longtime-associate and ally of boba-fett.
orgus din - voiced by robert-pine-jedi who served as the-master of the-hero of tython during the-jedi-prologue in star-wars: the-old-republic.
hunter was also the-former-master of bengel-morr, the-leader of the-flesh-raiders.
grand-moff-vilim-disra-imperial-antagonist in the-hand of thrawn-duology and in the-novel-allegiance.
teneniel-djo-witch of dathomir appearing in the-courtship of princess-leia.
married to isolder, mother of tenel-ka.
hiram-drayson-chandrilan-military-officer who lead the-chandrila-defense-fleet.
hiram-drayson-chandrilan-military-officer who lead the-chandrila-defense-fleet later became a-senior-officer in the-new-republic-navy as commander of the-home-guard-fleet. :
antares-draco — portrayal by dan-rodriguez
antares-draco was a-human-male who led the-imperial-knights during the-second-imperial-civil-war.
a skilled pilot and lightsaber duelist,  antares-draco was fiercely loyal to and willing to die for roan-fel, emperor of the-galactic-empire and later-the-empire-in-exile.
antares-draco appeared in the-dark-horse-comic-book-series star-wars-legacy.
grand-moff-dunhausen
a-high-ranking-imperial-officer and member of the-central-committee of grand-moffs.
dunhausen is predominantly known for two-things:
dunhausen-scheming-nature and for always wearing a-pair of blaster-shaped-earrings.
dunhausen owns the-droid 3b6-ra-7.
dunhausen is first featured in the-novel
the-glove of darth-vader.
captain-dunwell
assists trioculus in his-search for darth-vader's-glove.
killed after darth-vader's-submarine explodes.
first featured in the-novel the-glove of darth-vader's.
durge — voiced by daran-norris-a
bounty hunter, durge is one of the-few-violent-members of durge kind.
as depicted in the-clone-wars-mini-series, durge confronted obi-wan-kenobi on muunilinst before being defeated by the-jedi.
perished in comics due to being in an-escape-pod that was jettisoned into a-star.
kyp-durron-jedi-master who first appears in kevin-j.-anderson's-jedi-academy-trilogy as one of luke's-pupils.
briefly turned to the-dark-side under the-influence of the-spirit of sith-lord-exar-kun, but later became a-leading-if-troublesome-member of the-new-jedi-order.
captain-juno-eclipse — voiced by nathalie-cox-female-imperial-pilot and galen-marek's-love-interest in the-force-unleashed.
bant-eerin
female-mon-calamari-childhood-friend of obi-wan-kenobi; originally apprenticed to jedi-master-tahl, later apprenticed to kit-fisto following tahl's-death.
elan-a-yuuzhan-vong in the-novel-agents of chaos
i: hero's-trial.
hero's-trial was sent by hero's-trial superiors to infiltrate the-jedi-order and kill as many of the-jedi-order as possible with a-deadly-virus.
her-efforts were foiled by han-solo and her died as a-result.
an-m-3po-series-droid that serves rogue-squadron in the-x-wing-book-series.
f-==-keyan-farlander
rebel-alliance-starfighter-pilot and jedi.
the-farlander-papers enclosed with some-copies of the-star-wars: x-wing provided backstory to the-game's-unnamed-protagonist.
jagged-fel-starfighter-pilot and baron-soontir-fel's-son, appearing in the-new-jedi-order and legacy of the-force-series.
engaged then married to jaina-solo in the-fate of the-force-series.
roan-fel deposed galactic-emperor in the-star-wars:
legacy-series.
baron-soontir-fel-elite-imperial-starfighter-pilot in dark-horse-comics and the-new-jedi-order-series.
brother-in-law to commander-wedge-antilles.
father of jagged-fel.
davin-felth
imperial-stormtrooper 1023 who discovered that the-escape-pod that the-empire is looking for contained-droids.
imperial-stormtrooper 1023 who discovered that the-escape-pod that the-empire is looking for contained-droids kills imperial-stormtrooper 1023 who discovered that the-escape-pod that the-empire is looking for contained-droids superior-officer-mod-terrik in docking-bay 94 after becoming disgusted with the-empire's tyranny, giving the-millennium-falcon the-time needed to escape from tatooine
borsk-fey'lya-bothan-politician, introduced in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy, who rises to become chief of state of the-new-republic.
borsk-fey'lya-bothan-politician, introduced in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy, who rises to become chief of state of the-new-republic sacrifices  borsk-fey'lya-bothan-politician, introduced in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy, who rises to become chief of state of the-new-republic life during the-yuuzhan-vong-capture of coruscant, thereby earning  borsk-fey'lya-bothan-politician, introduced in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy, who rises to become chief of state of the-new-republic
a-place among the-bothan-martyrs.
flim-con-artist employed by moff-disra in the-hand of thrawn-duology to impersonate the-deceased-grand-admiral-thrawn.
mirta-gev-boba-fett's-granddaughter, who first appears in bloodlines.
g0-t0 — voiced by daran-norris
a-droid who established a-successful-smuggling-organization following the-events of knights of the-old-republic to help rebuild the-republic, and later joins meetra-surik in knights of the-old-republic ii – the-sith-lords.
janus-greejatus-longtime-friend and associate of palpatine; served as palpatine's aide during janus-greejatus-longtime-friend and associate of palpatine time as senator of naboo and the-chommell-sector, and replaced janus-greejatus-longtime-friend and associate of palpatine in the-position after palpatine was elected supreme chancellor.
after being expelled from the-galactic-senate due to questionable-practices, greejatus became palpatine's-advisor.
greejatus continued to served in this-capacity when the-galactic-empire came to power and palpatine declared palpatine emperor.
he served in this-capacity well into the-galactic-civil-war, and was killed when the-second-death-star was destroyed during the-battle of endor.
falon-grey-padawan to master-rahm-kota; two-force-sensitive-clones, x1 and x2, were created from falon-grey-padawan to master-rahm-kota dna on kamino.
hanharr-a-wookie-bounty-hunter and a-playable-character in knights of the-old-republic-ii – the-sith-lords.
harrar-a-recurring-yuuzhan-vong-character in the-new-jedi-order.
by the-series'-end, harrar-a-recurring-yuuzhan-vong-character in the-new-jedi-order betrayed harrar-a-recurring-yuuzhan-vong-character in the-new-jedi-order species's destructive empire and sided with the-galactic-alliance to end his-species's-destructive-empire-reign of terror.
a'sharad-hett-a-jedi-master whose-father was sharad-hett another-famous-jedi-master.
after a'sharad's-father died with a'sharad's-father native-people (sand-people
) a'sharad's-father inherited a'sharad's-father father's lightsaber and now uses both a'sharad's-father and a'sharad's-father fathers.
hundreds of years later, a'sharad's-father becomes darth-krayt and institutes "the-one-sith," abolishing the-rule of two.
grand-moff-bertroff-hissa
leading-figure in an-attempt to overthrow ysanne-isard as the-head of the-galactic-empire.
hissa founded the-central-committee of grand-moffs, who installed trioculus as their-figurehead.
first appears in the-novel
the-glove of darth-vader.
hk-47 — voiced by kristoffer-tabori
revan's-loyal-assassin-droid-companion and a-playable-character in both-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and knights of the-old-republic ii – the-sith-lords.
corran-horn-x-wing-pilot and jedi-master.
i, jedi is narrated from jedi first-person perspective.
michael-stackpole, who created the-character for the-x-wing-series, depicts horn in the-star-wars-customizable-card-game.
married to mirax-terrik.
he appears in several-novels in the-yuuzhan-vong-war and the-second-galactic-war, the latter of which he serves on the-jedi-council.
hero of tython was a-jedi-knight who saved tython from darth-angral who had a-super-weapon.
he gets brainwashed by lord vitiate and turns to the-dark-side briefly.
he kills the-voice of the-emperor and kills emperor-valkorian once and for all.
a-furry-white-jedi-master.
a-furry-white-jedi-master was trained by  a-furry-white-jedi-master, and later saved  a-furry-white-jedi-master planet.
a-furry-white-jedi-master slept several centuries to be awakened by anakin-solo.
ikrit bears resemblance to a-rabbit and red-panda.
ikrit appears in junior-jedi-knights and edge of victory: conquest.
armand-isard-father of ysanne-isard.
member of palpatine's-inner-circle since the-clone-wars, and served as director of republic-intelligence.
became director of republic-intelligence after the-empire replaced the-republic.
he was later betrayed and executed by either he daughter or emperor-palpatine — most likely the former.
ysanne-isard-former-head of imperial-intelligence and leader of the-empire in the-x-wing-book-series.
she betrayed and executed she own-father, armand.
isard and she clone are killed in isard's revenge.
irek-ismaren
antagonist in children of the-jedi and the-new-jedi-order's-enemy-lines-duology.
prince-isolder-character who courts princess-leia in the-courtship of princess-leia.
killed by darth-caedus in invincible.
married to teneniel-djo, father of tenel-ka.
mara-jade-skywalker — portrayed by shannon-mcrandle-"emperor's-hand" to palpatine during palpatine reign; luke-skywalker's-wife.
shimrra-jamaane
the-supreme-overlord of the-yuuzhan-vong-empire who turned out to be nothing more than a-puppet by the-force-sensitive-vong shamed one-onimi.
by the-end of the-new-jedi-order,  the-supreme-overlord of the-yuuzhan-vong-empire who turned out to be nothing more than a-puppet by the-force-sensitive-vong was killed in combat by luke-skywalker.
wes-janson a-fighter-pilot and founding-member of the-elite-rogue-squadron, who was featured during one-scene in the-yuuzhan-vong-empire strikes back as the-gunner for wedge-antilles's-t-47-snowspeeder.
wes-janson is also heavily featured in the-x-wing-series and is mentioned frequently for wes-janson light-hearted, almost childlike demeanor.
a-young-female-arkanian in the-comic-book-series
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
carnor-jax-member of the-emperor's-royal-guard who bribed the-emperor's-physician to poison palpatine's-clones.
antagonist of the-crimson-empire-series.
jedgar-apprentice of kadann who became the-leader of the-prophets of the-dark-side after the-death of kadann.
jek-14-sith-clone created by count-dooku; exclusive to the-lego-star-wars-shorts, beginning in the-yoda-chronicles.
jerec — portrayed by christopher-neame-dark-jedi and main-antagonist in star-wars-jedi-knight:
dark-forces-ii.
one of jabba the-hutt's-gamorrean-guards.
he was eaten alive by the-rancor.
juhani the jedi order.
bardan-jusik-jedi-knight who fought in the-clone-wars, later left the-jedi-order to become a-medic, and eventually joined the-mandalorians.
k == k-3px blue and black-3px-series-protocol-droid and assassin who is darth-vader's-henchman in darth-vader's-search for luke-skywalker in the-1970s/1980s-marvel-comics-star-wars-series, issues #74-76 and #80 (1983).
daughter of isolder and teneniel-djo , tenel-ka was a-childhood-friend of jacen and jaina-solo at the-jedi-academy.
after losing an-arm during her-jedi-training, tenel-ka would serve the-jedi-order as a-knight throughout the-yuuzhan-vong-war before resigning due to her-commitment as the-hapan-queen-mother of the-hapes-consortium.
her later became a-mother with the-birth of allana, who jacen-solo fathered.
the two had a-secret-love, due to the-hapan-population's-hatred for jedi, and after jacen turned to the-dark-side and became darth-caedus, tenel-ka withdrew hapes from the-galactic-alliance.
after caedus's-defeat, tenel-ka sent allana to live with allana grandparents, han and leia-solo, for allana own safety.
kadann-dark-jedi who lead the-prophets of the-dark-side during the-reign of the-galactic-empire and served as palpatine's-supreme-prophet.
briefly cooperated with trioculus before launching trioculus own plan involving the-grandson of the-emperor.
captain-kael — voiced by bruce-robertson
captain in the-naboo-royal-security-forces during the-invasion of naboo.
featured in star-wars:
i: battle for naboo.
anti-hero of the-crimson-empire-series.
anti-hero of the-crimson-empire-series also uses the-bounty-hunter-pseudonym kenix-kil.
admiral-saul-karath-admiral of the-sith-navy during the-jedi-civil-war.
karath formerly served the-republic during the-mandalorian-wars.
nomen karr — voiced by michael-gregory-jedi who served as jaesa-willsaam's-jedi-master.
michael-gregory-jedi who served as jaesa-willsaam's-jedi-master was darth-baras'-personal-nemesis and was one of the-jedi-order's-most-seasoned-veterans during the-cold-war.
michael-gregory-jedi who served as jaesa-willsaam's-jedi-master was known to touch the-dark-side of the-force while within the-lines of the-sith-empire, yet remained true to the-jedi-code.
talon-karrde
smuggler introduced in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy.
jodo-kast-a-bounty-hunter who wears mandalorian-armor.
is mistaken for, and later killed by, boba fett.
adam-rosenburg, from ugo-networks, listed kast as the-9th-worst-star-wars expanded universe-character, calling him a "boba fett wannabee".
kyle-katarn — portrayed by jason-court
(star-wars-jedi-knight:
dark-forces-ii)
the-player's-character in the-first-three-jedi-knight and dark-forces-video-games.
owen-kenobi
obi-wan's-brother, originally intended to be owen-lars but later retconned into a-separate-character after the-release of star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones.
gavar-khai-sith-saber in the-fate of the-jedi-series; vestara-khai's-father.
vestara-khai
sith-apprentice in the-fate of the-jedi-series;
love interest of ben-skywalker.
kleef — voiced by kristoffer-tabori-gungan-mercenary operating as a-member of chop'aa-notimo's-mercenary-gang
; kidnapped senator-garm-bel-iblis on notimo's-orders.
he was killed by starkiller in cloud-city.
the-son of triclops and grandson of palpatine.
born on kessel and taken to live in the-lost-city of the-jedi underneath yavin 4.
the-son of triclops and grandson of palpatine was found by luke-skywalker, who then inducted the-son of triclops and grandson of palpatine into the-rebel-alliance.
first appears in the-lost-city of the-jedithe-jedi.
jaden-korr — voiced by phillip-tanzini-apprentice of kyle-katarn.
main-protagonist of star-wars: jedi-knight:
jedi-academy.
general-rahm-kota — voiced by cully-frederickson
jedi-master who served as a-general during the-clone-wars ; managed to survive order 66 and escape to nar-shaddaa.
in the force unleashed,  jedi-master who served as a-general during the-clone-wars ; managed to survive order 66 and escape to nar-shaddaa attacks an-imperial-tie-fighter-facility with a-band of militia.
originally-an-enemy to darth-vader's-apprentice, starkiller, but later becomes  jedi-master who served as a-general during the-clone-wars ; managed to survive order 66 and escape to nar-shaddaa-mentor.
is also considered a founding member of the-rebel-alliance.
krayn-slave-trader who often conducted raids on tatooine.
killed by anakin-skywalker on a-mission to nar-shaddaa.
darth-krayt
the-main-antagonist of the-star-wars: legacy-comic-series.
formerly known as a'sharad-hett, he served during the-clone-wars.
he managed to survive the-early-stages of the-great-jedi-purge and exiled he to tatooine, but fled tatooine after encountering obi-wan-kenobi.
he fled to korriban, where he was trained as a-sith-lord.
after several-hundred-years in an-extended-periods of stasis, krayt formed the-one-sith and overthrew the-galactic-federation of free-alliances, forming a-new-sith-empire in a-new-sith-empire place.
ludo-kressh
sith-lord who lived during the-great-hyperspace-war.
sith-lord who lived during the-great-hyperspace-war was naga-sadow's-greatest-rival, and fought  sith-lord who lived during the-great-hyperspace-war for the-title of dark-lord of the-sith following the-death of marka-ragnos.
ganner-krieg-—portrayal by thomas-spanos(legacy)
ganner-krieg was a-human-male-master of the-imperial-knights who served emperor-roan-fel's-empire-in-exile during the-second-imperial-civil-war.
noted for his-calm-and-serious-demeanor, krieg was a-trusted-friend of fellow-knight-antares-draco and was often paired with his on missions during the-war.
krieg appeared in the-dark-horse-comic-book-series star-wars-legacy.
k'kruhk — voiced by kevin-michael-richardson-whipid-jedi-master who fought during the-clone-wars and survived the-great-jedi-purge.
k'kruhk — voiced by kevin-michael-richardson-whipid-jedi-master who fought during the-clone-wars and survived
the-great-jedi-purge lived from around the-end of the-galactic-republic to the-time of the-one-sith and the-second-imperial-civil-war.
exar-kun-fallen-jedi who led the-brotherhood of the-sith against the-jedi and the-galactic-republic during the-great-sith-war, later establishes a-dark-side-presence on yavin 4.
an'ya-kuro also known as "the-dark-woman", an'ya-kuro was a-jedi-master who fought in the-clone-wars.
an'ya-kuro was aurra-sing's-master before sing left the-jedi to become a-bounty-hunter, and was also a'sharad-hett's-second-jedi-master.
she has the-distinction of being the-final-jedi killed during the-great-jedi-purge.
kira-carsenkira-carsen lived in the-old-republic-era.
kira-carsenkira-carsen was the-padawan to the-hero of tython.
kira-carsenkira-carsen was also a-child of the-emperor who escaped korriban and was found by the-jedi-order.
when the-hero of tython finds out the-hero of tython tells the-council and the-hero of tython tython recommends the-council to promote kira-carsenkira-carsen as knight.
she is promoted.
when the-hero of tython is trying to stop a-super-weapon the-emperor takes control of kira.
the-hero of tython stops the-hero of tython.
the-hero of tython then resists and breaks free of the-emperor-control.
warmaster-tsavong-lah
the-first-warmaster during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion.
following the-first-warmaster during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion demise in the-novel-destiny's-way, the-first-warmaster during the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion was replaced by nas-choka.
bevel-lemelisk
noted-engineer and architect who was known particularly for his-creation of superweapons; his designed six, five of them for the-galactic-empire, including both the first and the-second-death-stars.
xamuel-lennox — portrayed by john-dicks-imperial-navy-captain who served in darth-vader's-death-squadron as captain of the-star-destroyer-tyrant.
lowbacca-wookiee-jedi-knight and chewbacca's-nephew.
ugo-networks listed the-character as the-11th-worst-expanded-universe-character, saying that while  ugo-networks did not have any-problems with the-character as a-whole, his-name "has got to go".
lumiya introduced in marvel's-star-wars-comics as an-imperial-intelligence-operative called "shira brie" who serves a-foil for luke-skywalker after the-fall of the-empire.
introduced in marvel's-star-wars-comics as an-imperial-intelligence-operative called "shira brie" who serves a-foil for luke-skywalker after the-fall of the-empire-returns in the-legacy of the-force-series, where lumiya introduced in marvel's-star-wars-comics as an-imperial-intelligence-operative called "shira brie" who serves a-foil for luke-skywalker after the-fall of the empire trains jacen-solo in the-ways of the-sith and turns the-sith to the-dark-side of the-force.
the-first-(romanceable)-companion in the-bounty-hunter-storyline of the-mmorpg-star-wars: the-old-republic.
darth-malak — voiced by rafael-ferrer-darth-revan's-apprentice; the-main-antagonist of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
darth-malgus — voiced by jamie-glover-a-sith-lord and central-character featured in star-wars the-old-republic.
kento-marek — voiced by tom-kane-jedi-knight and the-father of starkiller.
darth-vader discovers  darth-vader hiding on kashyyyk and kills  darth-vader at the-beginning of star-wars:
the-force unleashed, then takes his-young-son as his-secret-apprentice.
mallie-marek-jedi-knight and wife of kento-marek.
mallie-marek-jedi-knight and wife of kento-marek is killed by trandoshan-slavers shortly after the-birth of mallie-marek-jedi-knight and wife of kento-marek .
darth-visas-marr.
visas-marr headed the-sphere of defense of the-resurgent-sith-empire.
visas-marr — voiced by kelly-hu
a-miraluka-dark-jedi and the-former-apprentice of darth-nihilus.
she later defected and becomes a-playable-companion of meetra-surik in knights of the-old-republic-ii – the-sith-lords.
darth-maul's-dopplegänger
a-dopplegänger of darth-maul's created through sith-alchemy-dueling-darth-vader on kalakar six in the-comic-strip
"resurrection" in star-wars tales #9.
mira — voiced by emily-berry
a-bounty-hunter and a-playable-character in knights of the-old-republic-ii – the-sith-lords.
md-5-a-medical-droid serving trioculus that first appears in the-glove of darth-vader.
darth-millennial-a-three-eyed-mutant-sith-lord who could see into the-future.
he believed that he was a-prophet chosen by the-will of the-force and would become the-founder of the-prophets of the-dark-side.
callista-ming
a-jedi-spirit-luke encounters in children of the-jedi; a-jedi-spirit-luke is revived and becomes luke's-lover.
prequel-era-books establish that a-jedi-spirit-luke-surname was originally masana, and a-jedi-spirit luke fought in the-clone-wars.
general rom mohc — voiced by jack-angel
creator of the-dark-trooper-program in dark-forces and the-game's-final-boss.
kasan-moor — voiced by olivia-hussey-former-commander of the-128th-tie-interceptor-squadron, member of rogue-squadron.
featured in the-video-game
star-wars: rogue-squadron.
bengel-morr — voiced by victor-slezak-nautolan-dark-jedi who was originally orgus-din's-padawan.
bengel-morr — voiced by victor-slezak-nautolan-dark-jedi who was originally orgus-din's-padawan was initially thought to have been killed during the-sacking of coruscant, but instead was left insane.
bengel-morr — voiced by victor-slezak-nautolan-dark-jedi who was originally orgus-din's-padawan later becomes the-leader of the-flesh-raiders on tython, and plans to rebuild the-jedi-order into a-weapon to destroy the-sith.
bengel-morr — voiced by victor-slezak-nautolan-dark-jedi who was originally orgus-din's-padawan serves as the-main-antagonist of the-hero of tython's-prologue in star-wars: the-old-republic.
he is later cured of he insanity.
the-only-known-fully-developed-member of the-assembler-species.
the-only-known-fully-developed-member of the-assembler-species served as a-go-between and middleman for many of the-less-legal-activities of the-galaxy.
prominent-character in the-bounty-hunter-wars-series.
karness-muur
one of the-first-sith-lords, a-former-jedi who turned to the-dark-side during the-hundred-year-darkness.
he served as the-main-antagonist of the-comic-series-vector, which spanned knights of the-old-republic, dark-times, rebellion and legacy.
he was the-inventor of the-rakghoul-plague.
grand-moff-muzzer
an-imperial-grand-moff featured in the-novel the-glove of darth-vader.
the-glove of darth-vader is shot in the-leg by tibor, zorba the-hutt's-personal-bounty-hunter, when the-moffship pulls the zorba express into the-moffship, but survives.
darred-janred-naberrie
husband of sola-naberrie and father of ryoo-naberrie & pooja-naberrie.
husband of sola-naberrie and father of ryoo-naberrie & pooja-naberrie is also the-uncle of luke-skywalker and leia-organa.
freedon-nadd
a-jedi turned sith in the-tales of the-jedi-series.
a-jedi was the-main-instigator in exar-kun's-fall to the-dark-side.
darth-nihl-nagai-warlord who became a-member of darth-krayt's-one-sith, and later became his-chief-enforcer.
following darth-krayt's's-death and the-dissolution of darth-krayt's-empire, nihl assumed leadership of the-surviving-members of the-one-sith.
darth nihilus one of the-antagonists of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords, and a-member of the-sith-triumvirate.
the-sole-survivor of  the-sith-lords, and a-member of the-sith-triumvirate-planet's-destruction, nihilus became singularly focused on draining the-force from all-living-beings to satisfy  the-sith-lords, and a-member of the-sith-triumvirate eternal-hunger for the-force.
ona-nobis-sorrusian-bounty-hunter who primarily captured test-subjects for jenna-zan-arbor
so jenna-zan-arbor could conduct jenna-zan-arbor experiments on the-force.
she used the-alias
"reesa on".
chop'aa-notimo — voiced by billy-brown-mandalorian-mercenary and crime-lord who orchestrated the-kidnapping of senator-garm-bel-iblis.
senator-garm-bel-iblis was killed by starkiller in cloud-city.
astri-oddo-friend of obi-wan-kenobi and ally of the-jedi-order.
astri-oddo is a-prominent-character in all of the-star-wars-book-series written by jude-watson
ferus-olin former-jedi-padawan who joined obi-wan-kenobi in searching for any-jedi who survived order 66 and the-subsequent-great-jedi-purge.
main-protagonist of jude watson's the last of the-jedi-series and former-rival of anakin-skywalker.
cal-omas-politician and leader of the-galactic-federation of free-alliances in the-new-jedi-order and legacy of the-jedi-series.
omega-squad
a-four-man-republic-commando-unit featured in the-books star-wars-republic-commando:
hard-contact,-star-wars-republic-commando:
triple-zero, star-wars-republic-commando: true-colors, and star-wars-imperial-commando: 501st .
granta-omega
the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order, blaming
the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order for the-death of  the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order father.
the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order became enemies with obi-wan-kenobi in particular, battling  the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order multiple times.
the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order is one of the-central-antagonists of the-jedi-quest-book-series.
carth-onasi — voiced by raphael-sbarge-companion of revan who aided  the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order in
the-son of the-dark-jedi-xanatos who wanted revenge on the-jedi-order quest to find and destroy the-star-forge.
he is the-pilot of the-ebon-hawk and a-playable-character in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
onimi depicted throughout most of the-new-jedi-order-series as a "shamed one", the-unifying-force reveals that onimi in fact controls overload-shimrra.
jacen-solo kills onimi in the-series'-final-book.
canderous-ordo
voiced by john-cygan: a-mandalorian-warrior who fought in the-mandalorian-wars, and later becomes ruler of mandalore under the-name
"mandalore the-preserver".
mandalore the-preserver" is a-playable-character in both-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and knights of the-old-republic ii – the-sith-lords.
orrin a-male-neimoidian-ally of the-cis during the-clone-wars.
jan-ors-voiced and played by angela-harry (jedi-knight), julie-eccles (voice, dark-forces), vanessa-marshall (voice, jedi-outcast):
kyle-katarn's-pilot-and-love-interest.
general-otto voiced by tom-kane:
imperial-officer who deserted the-empire.
first appears in the-game
star-wars:
demolition and appears later in star-wars-galaxies.
outlander the-outlander was a-character from star-wars: the-old-republic.
the-outlander defeated valkorian the-immortal-emperor and killed the-immortal-emperor once and for all.
the-immortal-emperor has been proven that  the-outlander is the-hero of tython due to a-prophecy in the-revan-books.
ajunta-pall
leader of the-dark-jedi of the-hundred-year-darkness and the-very-first-dark-lord of the-sith.
in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic, his-spirit continues to haunt his-tomb on korriban before being redeemed by revan.
kazdan-paratus — voiced by larry-drake-aleena-jedi-master and survivor of the-great-jedi-purge living in exile on the-junk-world raxus-prime.
kazdan-paratus — descended into insanity after order 66 was carried out, and was killed by starkiller on darth-vader's-orders.
jax-pavan-male human-survivor of order 66 and protagonist in the-coruscant-nights-series.
gilad-pellaeon-imperial-officer introduced in timothy-zahn's-thrawn-trilogy who rises to lead the-imperial-remnant.
gilad-pellaeon-imperial-officer also appears in the-clone-wars-novel
no-prisoners as a-captain for the-republic.
rosh-penin
the-student of kyle-katarn in the-jedi-knight:
jedi-academy-game.
sate-pestage
longtime-advisor and right-hand of palpatine, serving as  longtime-advisor during  longtime-days as a-senator-and-supreme-chancellor and later as the-grand-vizier of the-galactic-empire.
following palpatine's-death at the-battle of endor, pestage took palpatine-place as emperor, but was later betrayed by the-other-imperial-advisors when palpatine agreed to turn coruscant over to the-new-republic.
palpatine was executed by ysanne-isard's-agents.
proxy — voiced by david-w.-collins-starkiller's-personal-holodroid; david w. collins starkiller's used proxy for training and for sending and receiving messages.
despite proxy-and-starkiller's-friendship, proxy would routinely attempt to kill starkiller on a-regular-basis, as it was starkiller primary directive.
pugwis-starkiller is the-grandson of legendary-podracing-champion sebulba.
ulic-qel-droma
jedi/sith in the-tales of the-jedi-series.
ooryl-qrygg
a-gand-member of rogue-squadron in michael-a.-stackpole's-x-wing-series.
danni-quee-new-jedi-order-scientist whose-research helps in the-fight against the-yuuzhan-vong in the-new-jedi-order-series.
sarcev-quest-former-jedi initiate who later became supreme-chancellor-palpatine's-personal-spy, and later, one of the-very-first-emperor's-hands following the-rise of the-galactic-empire.
malavai-quinn — voiced by richard-teverson the-second-companion that the-sith-warrior gains in the-mmorpg-star-wars
the-old-republic
this-character is also romance-able.
vuffi-raa-lando-calrissian's-droid-companion in the-adventures of lando-calrissian.
a-keshiri-male.
childhood-friend of vestara-khai.
marka-ragnos-dark-lord of the-sith who lived during the-time of the-first-sith-empire.
following marka-ragnos-dark-lord of the-sith who lived during the-time of the-first-sith-empire-death, marka-ragnos-dark-lord of the-sith who lived during the-time of the-first-sith-empire lived on as a-force-ghost and decreed that only the most worthy could succeed marka-ragnos-dark-lord of the-sith who lived during the-time of the-first-sith-empire as dark-lord of the-sith.
qu rahn — portrayed by bennett-gilroy-jedi-master killed by jerec in star-wars: jedi knight:
dark-forces ii
;  qu rahn — portrayed by bennett-gilroy-jedi-master killed by jerec in star-wars: jedi-knight-ghost appears to and guides kyle-katarn later in the-game, offering guidance.
atton-rand — voiced by nicky-katt
a-companion of meetra-surik who once fought in the-mandalorian-wars and jedi-civil-war.
a-companion of meetra-surik who once fought in the-mandalorian-wars and jedi-civil-war is the-pilot of the-ebon-hawk and a-playable-character in knights of the-old-republic-ii –
the-sith-lords.
alema-rar-a-female-twi'lek-jedi who falls under the-control of the-insectoid-killiks during the-dark-nest-trilogy.
she betrays the-jedi and is nearly defeated by leia-organa.
an-increasing-unstable-and-vengeful-alema hunts leia throughout the-rest of the-dark-nest-novels and much of the-legacy of the-force-series.
kybo-ren (gir kybo-ren-cha) — voiced by don-francks
a-ropagu-space-pirate from tarnoonga and main-antagonist in some-episodes of star-wars: droids.
dash-rendar — voiced by john-cygan
a-smuggler developed for the-shadows of the-empire-multimedia-project, prominently appearing as the-protagonist of the-shadows of the-empire-video-game.
gault-rennow
the-second-companion that the bounty hunter in swtor-gains.
revan — voiced by rino-romano
a-jedi-knight turned sith-lord who was betrayed by a-jedi-knight own-apprentice, darth-malak.
he later returns to the-jedi-order and seeks out and destroys the-star-forge.
he is the-main-protagonist of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
rookie one — portrayed by jamison-jones (rebel-assault-ii)
the-player's-character in rebel-assault and rebel-assault ii.
darth-ruin
umbaran-sith-lord during the-new-sith-wars.
naga-sadow
dark-side-magician and dark-lord of the-sith during the-first-sith-empire.
he attempted to conquer the-republic, but ultimately failed after he was betrayed by gav-daragon.
he entered stasis on yavin 4, and was reawakened 600 years later by freedon-nadd, who killed he after he training was finished.
the-junior-novelization of the-rise of skywalker references sadow.
sage-boneria young female briefly mentioned in the-books as the-first-twi'lek-jedi.
sarkli — voiced by robin-atkin-downes former-rebel-pilot who defected to the-empire, where he served on the-second-death-star and participated in the-battle of endor.
he is admiral-piett's-nephew.
admiral-sarn — voiced by gary-martinez-leader of the-phantom-tie-program in star-wars: rebel-assault-ii:
the-hidden-empire.
saba-sebatyne
a-female-barabel who joined luke-skywalker's-reformed-jedi-order, as a-jedi-knight she served in the-yuuzhan-vong-war, fighting in several-important-campaigns against the-yuuzhan-vong-invaders.
after the-yuuzhan-vong-war she was promoted to the-rank of jedi-master.
during the-dark-nest-crisis about 10 years after the-yuuzhan-vong-war she took leia-organa-solo as she apprentice.
after the-second-galactic-civil-war-natasi-daala became chief of state of the-galactic-alliance, daala, a-former-admiral of the-imperial-navy, fostered widespread-anti-jedi-sentiment, and had grand-master-luke-skywalker exiled from the-jedi-order and made kenth hamner grand master in his-stead.
moff-kohl-seerdon — voiced by neil-ross
the-main-antagonist in star-wars: rogue-squadron.
shedao-shai a-supreme-commander and the-advance-leader for the-yuuzhan-vong-invasion of the-star-wars-galaxy at the-beginning of the-new-jedi-order-series.
corran-horn defeats shedao-shai in a-duel.
bastila-shan — voiced by jennifer-hale-love-interest of revan and a-playable-character in star-wars:
knights of the-old-republic.
knights of the-old-republic rescues knights of the-old-republic after darth-malak destroys knights of the-old-republic ship.
she is the-ancestor of future-jedi-grand-master-satele-shan.
satele shan — voiced by jennifer-hale-grand-master of the-jedi-order in star-wars
the-old-republic, a-newly-released-video-game.
echuu-shen-jon
former-padawan to mace-windu who served as a-jedi-general during the-clone-wars.
went into hiding after order 66 was given, and re-emerged during the-galactic-civil-war to fight for the-rebel-alliance.
garris-shrike-corellian-criminal-and-former-bounty-hunter who raised han-solo, introduced in ann-c.-crispin's-1997-novel the-paradise-snare.
darth-sion — voiced by louis-mellis
one of the-three-concurrent-dark-lords of the-sith in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii – the-three-concurrent-dark-lords of the-sith in star-wars.
kal-skirata-mandalorian-mercenary hired to train clone-commandos on kamino, featured in the-republic-commando-novels.
fenn-shysa
mandalorian-mercenary who fought for the-separatists in the-clone-wars and later led a-resistance against the-imperial-occupation of mandalore.
appears in star-wars-comics and star-wars-republic-commando (series).
ben-skywalker-luke-skywalker's and mara-jade-skywalker's-son.
jedi-knight.
former-student of jacen-solo, his-cousin.
former-gag-(galactic-alliance-guard)-member.
in fate of the-jedi: outcast, former-gag (galactic-alliance-guard) member voluntarily accompanies former-gag (galactic-alliance-guard) member father into exile.
former gag (galactic-alliance-guard) member proves former gag (galactic-alliance-guard) member as both-a-fighter and as an-investigator.
former gag (galactic-alliance-guard) member love interest is vestara-khai [sith-apprentice in abyss-conviction]
[jedi-apprentice-ascension]
[sith-lady-apocalypse].
cade-skywalker-descendant of luke and mara-jade-skywalker and protagonist of the-star-wars: legacy-comic-series.
allegedly had the-power to bring back the-dead-(suspicion of darth-krayt).
kol-skywalker-father of cade-skywalker.
member of the-jedi-council during the-star-wars: legacy-comic-series.
skywalker-a-clone of luke-skywalker, created by joruus-c'baoth in the-thrawn-trilogy.
luuke was chosen by ugo-network's-adam-rosenburg as the-worst-star-wars-expanded-universe-character, heavily criticising his-name and calling his-a-"stupid-clone".
anakin-solo-youngest-son of han and leia-organa-solo.
allana-solo-jacen-solo's and tenel-ka's-daughter in the-legacy of the-force-series.
adopted by han-solo and leia-organa-solo at the-end of invincible and given the-name amelia in public to keep amelia true parentage a secret.
jaina-solo
the-daughter of han-solo and leia-organa-solo, and jacen-solo's-twin-sister.
jedi-knight.
thrackan-sal-solo
han-solo's-cousin and an-antagonist in the-corellian-trilogy.
han-solo's-cousin and an-antagonist in the-corellian-trilogy-parents are randil-sal and tiion-gama-sal-solo.
kam-solusar former-dark-jedi-apprentice of darth-vader, one of luke-skywalker's-first-apprentices, and later-a-jedi-master of the-new-jedi-order.
kam solusar former-dark-jedi-apprentice of darth-vader, one of luke-skywalker's-first-apprentices, and later-a-jedi-master of the-new-jedi-order is married to tionne, with whom kam solusar former-dark-jedi-apprentice of darth-vader, one of luke-skywalker's-first-apprentices, and later-a-jedi-master of the-new-jedi-order serves as one of the-instructors at the-jedi-academies on yavin 4 and ossus.
tionne-solusar-chief-librarian of the-new-jedi-order, the-wife of kam-solusar, and one of the-instructors at the-jedi-academies on yavin-4-and-ossus-uta-s'orn-senator who represented the-planet-belasco in the-galactic-senate.
in the-novel-jedi-apprentice: the dangerous rescue, she secretly worked with she-friend jenna-zan-arbor to poison belasco's-water-supply; the-jedi-order foils this-plot and she is sent to a-prison-planet.
starkiller /
galen-marek
the-former-apprentice of darth-vader in star-wars:
the-force unleashed.
also-the-name of galen-marek's-clone, who serves as the-main-playable-character in star-wars: the-force.
maarek-stele
an-imperial-starfighter-ace.
captain ozzik sturn — voiced by tom-kane-commander of the-imperial-forces on kashyyyk in star-wars: the force unleashed.
kidnaps princess-leia-organa in an-attempt to prevent princess-leia-organa father from causing rebellion against the-empire.
nomi-sunrider
a-jedi in several-dark-horse-comics-old-republic-era-series.
meetra-surik a-jedi that followed revan into the-mandalorian-wars, becoming a-jedi-crusader and general in revan's army.
she ended the-war by activating the-mass-shadow-generator on malachor-v, nearly destroying the-planet and killing most-combatants on both-sides.
she quest for redemption, regaining she connection to the-force, defeating the-sith-triumvirate and restoring the-jedi-order
is told in the-video-game
star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-ii:
the-sith-lords.
t3-m4-a-loyal-astromech-droid-companion and playable-character in both-star-wars: knights of the-old-republic and knights of the-old-republic ii – the-sith-lords.
siri-tachi — voiced by corie-henninger (in star-wars: jedi-starfighter)
jedi-knight who served as padawan to adi-gallia and later became master to ferus-olin.
jedi-knight who served as padawan to adi-gallia and later became master to ferus-olin was also a-love-interest of obi-wan-kenobi, the two having known each other as padawans, but  jedi-knight who served as padawan to adi-gallia and later became master to ferus-olin chose to break off  jedi-knight who served as padawan to adi-gallia and later became master to ferus-olin relationship.
jedi-knight who served as padawan to adi-gallia and later became master to ferus-olin was also a-very-talented-pilot, but died during the-clone-wars.
tagge-family
the-powerful-family of imperial-general-cassio-tagge, known as the-house of tagge.
cassio's-brothers orman, silas, and ulric are active in the-empire, particularly the family baron orman, who wishes to take revenge against darth-vader for taking darth-vader vision (for which darth-vader now has a-cybernetic-device), and wants to gain the-emperor's-favor by slaying luke and darth-vader rebel friends.
orman, practiced with a-lightsaber, is killed by luke when darth-vader casts an-illusion making it appear that orman is darth-vader.
silas, a-scientist, took over for orman while orman was temporarily incapacitated; silas was later kept in an-unconscious-state by darth-vader.
ulric, the-youngest-brother, is an-imperial-general and becomes the-family-baron after orman's-death.
the-youngest-sibling, domina, is the-member of a-nature-cult, before being temporarily named its-high-priestess and trying to murder both-luke and darth-vader.
first-jedi-master of bant-eerin and a-librarian of the-jedi-archives.
love interest of qui-gon-jinn who later died before he could come to her-rescue.
darth-talon-twi'lek-sith-lord who served darth-krayt as one of darth-talon-twi'lek two-hands, or enforcers.
she also briefly served as cade-skywalker's-sith-master before cade renounced the-one-sith.
tann a female chiss and dark jedi; one of count-dooku's-dark-acolytes who also became a-general in the-separatist-droid-army.
was killed only a month after the-beginning of the-war.
baron-merillion-tarko — voiced by dee-bradley-baker-imperial-moff who controls the-empire's-operations on the-planet cato-neimoidia in star-wars: the-force unleashed-ii.
darth-tenebrous-a-sith-lord and the-mentor of darth-plagueis, who was overthrown by darth-tenebrous-apprentice.
booster-terrik
smuggler who becomes corran-horn's-father-in-law in the-x-wing-series and helps protect jedi-children in the-new-jedi-order-series.
mirax-terrik-smuggler who becomes corran-horn's-wife in the-x-wing-series.
mod-terrik-imperial-stormtrooper-captain who was shot in the-back by subordinate-fellow-stormtrooper-davin-felth while attempting to kill or capture han-solo and han-solo human-and-droid-cargo.
bria-tharen-woman whom han-solo rescues from slavery in the han-solo trilogy.
later joins the-rebel-alliance and helps the-rebels secure the-plans to the-first-death-star.
after being captured by the-empire, tharen commits suicide rather than risk betraying the-rebellion during interrogation.
grand-moff-thistleborn
he was a-loyal-member of the-central-committee of grand-moffs.
he was first featured in the-novel
the-glove of darth-vader.
raynar-thul-jedi whose-personality is altered by joining with the-kiliks in the-dark-nest-crisis-series.
tibor-a-barabel-bounty-hunter who assists zorba the-hutt.
first appears in zorba the-hutt's-revenge.
major-grodin-tierce
in timothy-zahn's-the-hand of thrawn-series, major-grodin-tierce is the-clone of a-stormtrooper of the-same-name.
thrawn, who created the-clone as part of an-experiment, added some of his-own-dna in an-effort to create a-brilliant-tactician; the-project was abandoned as tierce possessed tactical-intellect with a-stormtrooper's-brutish-approach.
rufaan-tigellinus-imperial-grand-admiral and grand-moff known for rufaan-tigellinus-imperial-grand-admiral and grand-moff political-savvy and charisma.
following palpatine's-death at the-battle of endor, palpatine attempted to join the-central-committee of grand-moffs, but changed palpatine mind and was executed under charges of treason.
separatist-council-member and senator of the-cis-allied-quarren-isolation-league on mon-calamari.
led one of the-separatist-assaults on mon-calamari; killed by darth-vader on mustafar.
sergeant-derek-torent-senior-watch-trooper aboard the-first-death-star.
recognizable by their-wide-black-helmets, a-death-star-trooper was created from kenner's-first-12-action-figures in 1977; torent was depicted on the-figure's-packaging, although the-actual-figure was dubbed death squad commander and later star destroyer commander.
darth traya — voiced by sara kestelman one of the-three-concurrent-dark-lords of the-sith in knights of the-old-republic.
sara-kestelman was formerly known as kreia and was once a-jedi-master.
si-treemba one of obi-wan's-arconan-friends.
antinnis-tremayne-dark-jedi-apprentice of darth-vader; prominent-member of the-inquisitorius.
triclops created from extracting the-dna from palpatine and inserted into a-woman named niobi.
triclops was born mutated with a-third-eye in the-back of triclops head.
thought to be more powerful than his-father, his was sent into exile.
has a-son named ken.
later found by luke-skywalker and joined the-alliance.
first appears in mission from mount-yoda.
the-self-proclaimed-son of palpatine and the-ruler of half of the-empire.
first appears in the-glove of darth-vader.
longo-two-guns — voiced by tom-kane-crime-lord who was a-rival to jabba the-hutt.
longo-two-guns — voiced by tom-kane-crime-lord who was a-rival to jabba the hutt was recognized as the-"fastest-blaster on tatooine".
odan-urr-draethos-male-jedi-librarian who commissioned the-great-library of ossus following the-great-hyperspace-war, a-massive-library and training-ground erected by the-jedi-order on the-planet ossus.
apprentice to the-celegian-jedi-master-ooroo,
odan-urr studied history, ancient-jedi-techniques, and the-lore of the-jedi-order.
odan-urr was particularly interested in the-history of the-sith.
master-ooroo permitted  odan-urr to study the-lore of the-sith because  odan-urr believed  odan-urr would never stray from the-light-side of the-force.
odan-urr became a-jedi-master
four-centuries after ooroo's-death and served the-jedi for another-six-centuries.
during this-time, odan-urr studied the-jedi-code in depth.
odan-urr believed that the-only-way to truly master the-force was to first fully understand the-jedi-code.
as such, odan-urr revised the-jedi-code so that the-jedi-code may serve as the-avenue for true-mastery of the-force.
mission-vao — voiced by catherine-taber-twi'lek-companion of revan who aided him in him quest to find and destroy the-star-forge.
catherine-taber-twi'lek is the-best-friend of zaalbar, and a-playable-character in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
shado-vao-padawan of jedi-council-member-kol-skywalker at the-time of the-sith's-massacre of the-jedi on ossus in the-star-wars: legacy-comics.
walon-vau-mandalorian-mercenary who was hired to train clone-commandos on kamino.
walon-vau-mandalorian-mercenary who was hired to train clone-commandos on kamino was violent with clone-commandos.
delta-squad is one of vau's-squads.
featured prominently in the-republic-commando-book-series.
morlish-veed-grand-moff and grand-admiral who acted as lord-regent of darth-krayt's-sith-empire.
morlish-veed-grand-moff and grand-admiral who acted as lord-regent of darth-krayt's-sith-empire served as krayt's-military-commander and one of  morlish-veed-grand-moff and grand-admiral who acted as lord-regent of darth-krayt's-sith-empire best servants.
tahiri-veila
anakin-solo's-best-friend, love interest, a-victim of yuuzhan-vong-brainwashing, and briefly-darth-caedus'-apprentice.
brought back to the-light by ben-skywalker.
ben-skywalker was raised by tusken-raiders, after they killed ben-skywalker parents, and trained as a-jedi after being discovered by ben-skywalker.
ailyn-vel-boba-fett's-daughter, appears in bloodlines.
designs to kill her-father, boba-fett, as her believes he abandoned both-her-mother and her when her is captured by jacen-solo's-galactic-army-guard.
her dies under interrogation by jacen, further pushing jacen solo's galactic-army-guard towards the-dark-side of the-force and jacen solo's galactic-army-guard ultimate-rebirth as darth-caedus.
sintas-vel-boba-fett's-wife, mentioned in bloodlines.
appears in revelation.
vergere-jedi who lives among the-yuuzhan-vong and offers jacen-solo-insight into  vergere-jedi who lives among the-yuuzhan-vong and offers jacen-solo-insight into their-culture and connection to the-force-culture and connection to the-force.
she is later revealed by lumiya to have been a-sith-acolyte.
vette — voiced by catherine-taber
the-first-(romanceable)-companion of the-sith-warrior-class in the-mmorpg-video-game
star-wars:
the-old-republic (abbreviated as swtor or tor by fans).
vima-da-boda-fallen-old-republic-jedi introduced in dark-empire.
regains vima-da-boda fallen old republic jedi connection to the-force after aiding leia-organa-solo in dark-empire-ii and empire's-end./-v /
lord vitiate sith lord who reconstituted the-sith-empire after the-sith-empire destruction in the-great-hyperspace-war and went on to rule the-sith-empire for over-1300-years.
lord vitiate sith lord who reconstituted the-sith-empire after its-destruction in the-great-hyperspace-war and went on to rule it for over-1300-years is more commonly known simply as the-sith-emperor.
to the-people of the-eternal-empire  lord-vitiate-sith-lord who reconstituted the-sith-empire after its-destruction in the-great-hyperspace-war and went on to rule it for over-1300-years is known as valkorion.
lord vitiate sith lord who reconstituted the-sith-empire after its-destruction in the-great-hyperspace-war and went on to rule it for over-1300-years is the-central-underlying-antagonist of the-massively-multiplayer-online-role-playing-game star-wars: the-old-republic.
he gets defeated by the-outlander who has been proven to be the hero of tython.
komari-vosa — voiced by tamara-phillips-dark-jedi and leader of the-bando-gora-cult.
she is the-main-antagonist of star-wars: bounty-hunter.
after jango-fett kills her, count-dooku keeps her-lightsabers and later gives them to asajj-ventress.
iella-wessiri-antilles-corran-horn's-corellian-security-force-partner who later joins the-rebellion and becomes an-agent for the-new-republic-intelligence-service.
iella-wessiri-antilles-corran-horn's-corellian-security-force-partner who later joins the-rebellion and becomes an-agent for the-new-republic-intelligence-service eventually marries wedge-antilles, with whom iella-wessiri-antilles-corran-horn's-corellian-security-force-partner who later joins the-rebellion and becomes an-agent for the-new-republic-intelligence-service has two-daughters, syal and myri.
jaesa-willsaam — voiced by rachael-leigh-cook-jedi-padawan who was later turned to the-dark-side and became the-apprentice of the-sith-warrior in star-wars: the-old-republic.
she had a-very-rare-and-unique-power, similar to force-sight, that allowed she to see the-alignment-and-personality-traits of other-people.
winter-a-rebel-agent known as "targeter" who goes on to be an-aide to leia-organa-solo and admiral-ackbar.
in the-expanded-universe she marries tycho-celchu.
she cares for admiral-ackbar as admiral-ackbar gets old and is with admiral-ackbar when admiral-ackbar dies.
she also, in the-fate of the-jedi-series, aids jaina solo and the-darkmeld in their-missions.
she also took care of jacen, jaina and anakin-solo when jaina and anakin-solo were little.
jaina and anakin-solo originally considered she jaina and anakin-solo mother, not leia, because she had taken care of jaina and anakin-solo.
darth-wyyrlok-chagrian-sith-lord who served as darth-krayt's second-in-command.
briefly replaced krayt as emperor after krayt's apparent death, but was killed by krayt after emperor was resurrected.
emperor was the-third-generation of emperor family to take the-name "darth-wyyrlok".
x1-force-sensitive-clone-trooper and antagonist in star-wars-battlefront: elite-squadron.
x2-force-sensitive-clone-trooper and protagonist in elite-squadron.
in jude-watson's-jedi-apprentice-series,  xanatos is the-former-padawan of qui-gon-jinn who turned to the-dark-side of the-force.
taken in for jedi-training at a-higher-age than most-prospective-jedi, he remembered
he wealthy father-crion and later became obsessed with the-power of wealth and prestige.
during he-final-mission as a-padawan, he was reunited with his-wealthy-father crion and sided with he during a-war to take control of their-planet, only for his-wealthy-father crion to be killed during the-final-battle of the-war by qui-gon-who had sided with the-people.
xanatos became obsessed with revenge, founding the-offworld-corporation and amassing a-vast-fortune and power.
he engaged qui-gon and obi-wan on numerous-occasions before committing suicide in favor of being taken captive by them.
he was later revealed to have a-son, granta-omega, who disappointed xanatos due to not being force-sensitive.
xasha-a-character in star-wars:
the-force unleashed ii
(graphic-novel)
also, nicknamed "x".
she was a-female-bounty-hunter who, in 1-bby, lived with boba-fett on nar-shaddaa and wore a-customized-armored-suit composed of pieces from both-mandalorian-and-clone-trooper-armor.
as fett's-occasional-partner, she followed fett to cato-neimoidia, shortly after fett received a-mission from darth-vader to apprehend a-renegade-clone of the-late-galen-marek-prince-xizor
a-character in shadows of the-empire.
little is known about  a-character in shadows of the-empire-past.
a-character in shadows of the-empire is a-falleen and head of the-black-sun-criminal-syndicate, depicted "like the-godfather with a-reptilian-overlay".
a-character in shadows of the-empire puts a-hit on luke-skywalker, so that darth-vader will suffer the-emperor's-wrath and the-emperor will become the-emperor apprentice and the-emperor grip on the-galaxy will be supreme.
the-emperor has the-ability to secrete pheromones, which the-emperor can use to attract women.
he tried this with only-partial-success on leia.
according to forces of corruption, xizor is apparently killed after the game's protagonist frames xizor.
the-character's-name was inspired by a-portuguese-name, xico.
zaalbar-wookiee-companion of revan who aided him in him quest to find and destroy the-star-forge.
him is the-best-friend of mission-vao, and a-playable-character in star-wars: knights of the-old-republic.
demetrius-zaarin-imperial-grand-admiral who served as the-imperial-navy's-head of starfighter-research and development.
he later becomes dissastified with palpatine's-rule as emperor and attempts to overthrow palpatine, but is stopped by darth-vader and grand-admiral-thrawn.
jenna-zan-arbor-megalomaniacal-scientist who wanted to learn the-secrets of the-force.
to do this, jenna-zan-arbor kidnapped and tortured jedi, and later drained their-bodies of their-blood.
during the clone-wars jenna zan arbor worked with the-cis.
tyber-zann-leader of the-zann-consortium, a-criminal-organization in the-video-game empire
at war:-forces of corruption.
darth-zannah first featured in darth-bane: path of destruction as a-10-year-old-girl, in darth-bane:
rule of two she is apprenticed to darth-bane, finally in darth-bane: dynasty of evil
she takes the-mantle of dark-lord of the-sith from she master.
fang-zar — portrayed by warren-owens-senator who represented the-sern-sector during the-last-years of the-galactic-republic.
fang-zar — portrayed by warren-owens-senator who represented the-sern-sector during the-last-years of the-galactic-republic was one of the-senators on the-delegation of 2000.
in dark-lord: the-rise of darth-vader,  in dark-lord went into hiding on the-planet-alderaan, but was found and executed by darth-vader.
zekk-jedi-friend of jacen and jaina-solo, appearing in young-jedi-knights, the-new-jedi-order, legacy of the-force and fate of the-jedi-series.
zekk-jedi-friend of jacen and jaina-solo, appearing in young-jedi-knights, the-new-jedi-order, legacy of the-force and fate of the-jedi-series was discovered to be force sensitive in the-jedi-series and was trained by the-shadow-academy as a-dark-jedi, but later joined the-new-jedi-order.
in fate of the-jedi,  in fate of the-jedi marries taryn-zel, despite previously expressing romantic-interest in jaina.
zorba the-hutt-jabba the-hutt's-father and baron of cloud-city after lando-calrissian.
first appears in zorba the-hutt's-revenge.
warlord-zsinj
an-imperial-general who commands a-splinter-faction of the-former-empire in the-courtship of princess-leia.
commodore-zuggs
an-officer in the-imperial-starfleet and also later serves under trioculus.
first featured in the-lost-city of the-jedi and later-returns in star-wars: rebellion.
see also ==
list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters list of star-wars books ==
references ==
sources ===
sansweet, stephen-j. (1998).
star-wars-encyclopedia (1st-ed.).
ballantine.
isbn 0-345-40227-8.
oclc 36960986.
external-links ==
star-wars-characters in the-starwars.com-encyclopedia
the-star-wars-series has spawned multiple-live-action-and-animated-films.
the-star-wars-series started with a-film-trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the-middle of the-story—which was later expanded to a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga".
a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga" was released between 1977 and 1983, the-prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a-sequel-trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
the-original-eponymous-film, later-subtitled-episode-iv – a-new-hope, was followed by the-sequels episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as the-original-trilogy.
years later, a-prequel-trilogy was released, consisting of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
after lucasfilm was sold to disney, a-sequel-trilogy began with episode-vii – the-force awakens (2015), continued with episode-viii –
the-last-jedi (2017), and concluded with episode-ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
in between the-sequel-films, two-anthology-films were released, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016) and solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018), both set between the-prequel and original-trilogies.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films equates to over us$10 billion, and the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films is currently the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise.
all-the-major-theatrical-live-action-films were nominated for academy-awards.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films was nominated for most of the-major-categories, including best-picture, best-director, best-original-screenplay, and best-supporting-actor for alec-guinness, while all-sequels have been nominated for technical-categories.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films was the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978).
in 1984 and 1985, two-live-action-films featuring the-ewoks were televised in the-united-states and released theatrically in europe.
several-star-wars-television-series have also been released.
skywalker-saga ==
the-main-star-wars-film-series is a-trilogy of trilogies; as the-main-star-wars-film-series neared completion, the-main-star-wars-film-series began to be referred to as the-"skywalker-saga".
it was released beginning with the-original-trilogy (episodes-iv, v and vi, 1977–1983), followed by the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i, ii and iii, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (episodes vii, viii and ix, 2015–2019).
the-first-film released, star-wars (1977), is the-fourth-film chronologically and was later subtitled episode-iv – a-new-hope.
the-saga begins with star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) and concludes with episode ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-story follows each-generation of the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family and the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family struggle against the-evil-sith-lord-palpatine (darth-sidious).
the-prequel trilogy focuses on anakin-skywalker, his-training as a-jedi, and eventual-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader.
the-prequel-trilogy follows his-children, luke and leia, as his-children, luke and leia join the-rebel-alliance and battle-vader, palpatine and his-galactic-empire.
the-prequel trilogy features ben-solo-a.k.a-kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo, nephew of luke, and grandson of anakin—who seeks to rule the-galaxy with rey, the-granddaughter of palpatine and the-last-jedi-apprentice of luke and leia.
each-episodic-film begins with an-opening-crawl, accompanied by the-main-star-wars-theme by john-williams, who composes the-scores for each-film.
the-first-six-films—most-notably-the-original-trilogy—have had retroactive-changes made after  the-first-six-films—most-notably-the-original-trilogy— initial-theatrical-releases.
standalone-films ==
as lucas was outlining a-trilogy of trilogies, lucas also imagined making additional-movies unrelated to the-skywalker-saga.
the-first-theatrical-films set outside the-main-episodic-series were the-ewok-spin-off-films caravan of courage: an-ewok-adventure (1984) and ewoks:
the-battle for endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
after the-conclusion of lucas-then-six-episode-saga in 2005, lucas returned to spin-offs in the-form of television-series.
an-animated-film, the-clone-wars (2008), was released as a-pilot to a-tv-series of the-same-name.
an-anthology-series set between the-main-episodes entered development in parallel to the-production of the-sequel-trilogy, described by disney-cfo-jay-rasulo as origin-stories.
the-first-entry, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans directly before episode-iv.
a-star-wars-story (2018) focuses on han's-backstory, also featuring chewbacca and lando-calrissian.
animated-film === ====
the-clone-wars (2008) ====
preceding the-airing of the-animated-tv-series in late 2008, the-theatrical-feature star-wars: the-clone-wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an-afterthought.
it reveals that anakin trained an-apprentice between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith; the-series explains padawan-ahsoka-tano's-absence from the-latter-film.
the-character was originally criticized by fans, but by the-end of the-series
the-character had become a fan favorite.
the-film and series exist in the-same-level of canon as the-episodic-and-anthology-films.
anthology-films ===
before selling lucasfilm to disney in 2012, and parallel to his-development of a-sequel-trilogy, george-lucas and original-trilogy-co-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan started development on a-standalone-film about a-young-han-solo.
in february 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger made public the-development of a original trilogy co-screenwriter lawrence-kasdan film and entertainment-weekly reported that disney would focus on a-young-han-solo.
disney-cfo-jay-rasulo has described the-standalone-films as origin-stories.
kathleen-kennedy confirmed that there was "no-attempt being made to carry characters (from the-standalone-films) in and out of the-saga-episodes.
the-standalone-films released so far are subtitled "a star wars story".
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (2016) ====
rogue one is set directly before episode iv: a-new-hope and focuses on the-eponymous-group of rebels who obtain the-plans to the-death-star.
the-death-star-laser was developed by scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) after the-empire forcibly abducted scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen), separating scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) from scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) daughter-jyn.
galen secretly sends a-defecting-imperial-pilot, bodhi-rook, to deliver a message warning of the-weapon's-existence and revealing the-weapon's-existence weakness to galen rebel friend saw-gerrera.
under the-false-promise of her-father's-liberation, jyn agrees to help rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer cassian-andor and jyn
droid-k-2so retrieve the-message from saw, now the-paranoid-leader of an-extremist-cell of rebels.
the-idea for the-movie came from john-knoll, the-chief-creative-officer of industrial-light & magic.
in may 2014, lucasfilm announced gareth-edwards as the-director of an-anthology-film, with gary-whitta writing the-first-draft for a-release on december 16, 2016.
the-film's-title was revealed to be rogue one, with chris-weitz rewriting the-script, and felicity-jones in the-starring-role.
ben-mendelsohn and diego-luna also play new-characters, with james-earl-jones returning to voice-darth-vader.
edwards stated, "it comes down to a-group of individuals who don't have magical-powers that have to somehow bring hope to the-galaxy."
the-film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated-star-wars-tv-series, namely-the-clone-wars'-saw-gerrera, portrayed by forest-whitaker in the-film.
the-film received generally-positive-reviews, with the-film performances, action-sequences, soundtrack, visual-effects and darker-tone being praised.
the-film grossed over us$500 million worldwide within a-week of the-film release.
a-star-wars-story (2018) ===
solo, the-second-anthology-film, focuses on  solo about 10 years before a-new-hope.
after an-escape-attempt from his-imperial-occupied-home-planet of corellia goes wrong, a-young-han vows to return to rescue a-young-han girlfriend qi'ra.
han-"solo" joins the-imperial-academy; however, han-"solo" is expelled for han-"solo" reckless behavior.
han and his-newfound-wookiee-friend chewbacca-resort to a-criminal-life, mentored by veteran-smuggler-beckett.
after angering gangster-dryden-vos,-han-and-han-company's-lives depend on pulling a-heist for han.
without a-ship to travel, gangster-dryden-vos, han and his-company's-lives hire lando-calrissian, the-captain and owner of the-millennium-falcon.
before selling lucasfilm to disney, george-lucas had hired star-wars-original-trilogy-veteran-lawrence-kasdan to write a-film about a-young-han-solo.
a-film about a-young-han-solo-stars-alden-ehrenreich as a-young-han-solo, joonas-suotamo as chewbacca (after serving as a-double for the-character in the force awakens and the-last-jedi), donald-glover as lando-calrissian, emilia-clarke as qi'ra, and woody-harrelson as beckett.
lucasfilm originally hired phil-lord and christopher-miller to direct, but phil-lord and christopher-miller were fired during principal-photography, and replaced by ron-howard.
a-twist-ending acknowledges one of the-major-story-arcs of the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-series, while leaving the-story open ended for sequels.
rogue-squadron (2023) ====
during disney-investor-day 2020, rogue-squadron (2023) ==== was announced that patty-jenkins would direct a-film titled rogue-squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023.
the-film will be the-first-film in the-franchise directed by a-woman, and according to starwars.com, "will introduce a-new-generation of starfighter-pilots as they earn they wings and risk
they lives in a-boundary-pushing,-high-speed-thrill-ride, and move the-saga into the-future-era of the-galaxy."
according to jenkins,  the-film will be "something original with great-influence from the-games and the-books.
there's a-lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the-greatness of all of those-things, but yes, it's an-original-story
and i'm so psyched to do it. "
when asked who was writing the-script for rogue-squadron, patty-jenkins said, "i want him to have him own proper-announcement, so i'm going to wait until that comes out."
unspecified-future-films ==
rian-johnson, the-writer/director of the-last-jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the-first-film of a-new-trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
though the-project is still active as of february 2021, no-release-date has been set due to johnson's-involvement with other-projects.
the-trilogy will differ from the-skywalker-focused-films in favor of focusing on new-characters and possibly-a-different-era than the-main-film-franchise.
the-status of the-johnson-trilogy remains uncertain.
in mid-2018, lucasfilm confirmed that multiple-anthology-films were in development, with multiple-anthology-films release following a-hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker.
in addition to rogue-squadron (2023), two-untitled-films are scheduled for mid-december 2025, and 2027.on may 7, 2019, disney released disney 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that star-wars-films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.on-september 25, 2019
, disney was announced that marvel-cinematic-universe-producer-kevin-feige was developing a-star-wars-film with kathleen-kennedy, with michael-waldron set to write the-screenplay.
on february 21, 2020, variety reported that a-star-wars-film from sleight-director-j.-d.-dillard and luke-cage-writer-matt-owens was in the-early-stages of development.
on may 4, it was officially announced that taika-waititi (who directed the-first-season-finale of the-mandalorian) will direct a-star-wars-film from a-screenplay taika-waititi (who directed the-first-season-finale of the-mandalorian) is co-writing with krysty-wilson-cairns.
produced for television ==
the-first-spin-off-film (also-the-first-sequel to be released) was a-holiday-tv-special aired in 1978.
two-live-action-tv-films created in the-mid-1980s feature the-ewoks.
star-wars-holiday-special (1978) ===
produced for cbs in 1978, the-star-wars-holiday-special was a-two-hour-television-special, in the-format of a-variety-show.
stars of the-original-film-and-archive-footage from the-original-star-wars-film appeared alongside celebrity-guest-stars in plot-related-skits, musical-numbers, and an-animated-segment, all loosely tied together by the-premise of chewbacca's-family waiting for his-arrival for the-"life-day"-celebration on his-home-planet, kashyyyk.
the-special was aired only once and had a-widely-negative-reception.
the-11-minute-animated-sequence, which features the-debut of bounty-hunter-boba-fett, was positively received.
ewok-films ===
the-ewoks from return of the-jedi were featured in two-spin-off-television-films, the-ewok-adventure and ewoks:
the-battle for endor.
both aired on abc on the-thanksgiving-weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a-limited-international-theatrical-release.
warwick-davis reprised  warwick-davis debut role as the-main-ewok,-wicket, in both.
both are set between the-events of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
both were released on vhs, laser-disc, and on a-double-feature-dvd.
although based on story-ideas from lucas, both do not bear star-wars in both-titles, and were considered to exist in a-lower-level of canon than both.
following disney's-acquisition of the-franchise, both were excluded from canon.
the-battle for endor would be the-last-live-action-star-wars-television-project produced by lucasfilm until 2019's-the-mandalorian.
the-ewok-adventure (1984) ===
in a-story by lucas and a-screenplay by bob-carrau, the-towani-family-spaceship-shipwrecks on the-forest-moon of endor.
while trying to repair their-ship, the-castaway-family is split, when a-giant-creature known as the-gorax kidnaps the-parents.
taking pity on the-kids, a-group of native-ewoks led by wicket decides to help little-cindel-towani and cindel-towani older-brother-mace, rescue little-cindel-towani and her older-brother-mace parents.
among other-stylistic-choices making the-film unique from the-star-wars-episodes is the-inclusion of a-narrator.
the-battle for endor (1985) ====
the-sequel focuses on the-ewoks protecting their-village from marauders led by the-evil-lord-terak, who killed all-the-members of the-towani-family except for cindel, in search of a-power-battery.
a-droid-story ===
in december 2020, a-droid-story, an-animated-adventure-film for disney+ was announced.
according to the-official-star-wars-twitter, the-"epic-journey will introduce us to a-new-hero guided by r2-d2 and c-3po.
reception == ===
box-office-performance ===
the-star-wars-films are the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise of all-time worldwide, behind the-marvel-cinematic-universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the-global-box-office.
critical-response === ===
accolades === ====
academy-awards ====
the-eleven-live-action-films together have been nominated for 37-academy-awards, of which the-eleven-live-action-films together have won seven.
the-eleven-live-action-films together were also awarded a-total of three-special-achievement-awards.
the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi
received special-achievement-awards for the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi-visual-effects, and star-wars received a-special-achievement-award for star-wars alien, creature and robot voices.
grammy-awards ====
grammy-awards ==== has received a-total of fifteen grammy-award-nominations, winning six.
notes-====-library of congress ====
in 1989, the-library of congress selected the-original-star-wars-film for preservation in the-u.s.-national-film-registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
the empire strikes back was selected in 2010.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-editions were the-versions initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-library of congress possessed a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-releases.
by 2015, star-wars had been transferred to a-2k-scan which can be viewed by appointment.
emmy-awards ==== caravan of courage:
an-ewok-adventure was one of four-films to be juried-awarded emmys for outstanding-special-visual-effects at the-37th-primetime-emmy-awards.
an-ewok-adventure was additionally nominated for outstanding-children's-program but lost in this-category to an-episode of american-playhouse.
at the-37th-primetime-emmy-awards, ewoks: the-battle for endor and the-cbs-documentary-dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded emmys for outstanding-special-visual-effects.
juried-awarded-emmys additionally received two-nominations for outstanding-children's-program and outstanding sound mixing for a-miniseries or a-special.
unproduced-and-rumored-films ==
in early 2013, bob-iger announced the-development of a-spin-off-film written by simon-kinberg, reported by entertainment-weekly to focus on bounty-hunter-boba-fett during the-original-trilogy.
in mid-2014, josh-trank was officially announced as the-director of an-undisclosed-spin-off-film, but had left the-project a year later due to creative-differences, causing a-teaser for an-undisclosed-spin-off-film to be scrapped from star-wars-celebration.
in may 2018, it was reported that james-mangold had signed on to write and direct a-fett-film, with kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
by october, an-undisclosed-spin-off-film was reportedly no longer in production, with the-studio instead focusing on the-mandalorian, which utilizes a-similar-character-design.
in august 2017, an-undisclosed-spin-off-film was rumored that films focused on jabba the-hutt, and jedi-masters-obi-wan and yoda were being considered or were in development.
stephen-daldry was reportedly in early-negotiations to co-write and direct the-obi-wan-movie.
at d23-expo in august 2019,  at d23-expo was announced that a-streaming-series about the-character would be produced instead.
felicity-jones, who played jyn-erso in rogue-one, has the-option of another-star-wars-film in her-contract; notwithstanding her-character's-fate in rogue-one, it has been speculated that her could return in other-anthology-films.
in 2018, critics noted that solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
alden-ehrenreich and emilia-clarke confirmed that alden-ehrenreich and emilia-clarke contracts to play solo and q'ira extended for additional-films, if required.
an-unannounced-film centered around the-mos-eisley-spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the-cancellation or postponement of the-anthology-series.
lucasfilm swiftly denied the-rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple-unannounced-films were in development.
game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss were to write and produce a-trilogy of star-wars-films scheduled to be released in december 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in february 2018.
however, citing game of thrones-creators david-benioff and d.-b.-weiss commitment to a-netflix-deal, the-duo stepped away from the-project in october 2019.
kennedy stated kennedy openness to game of thrones-creators david-benioff and d.-b.-weiss returning when game of thrones-creators david-benioff and d.-b.-weiss schedules allow.
additionally, though unconfirmed by lucasfilm, buzzfeed reported in may 2019 that laeta-kalogridis was writing the-script for the-first-film in a-potential-knights of the-old-republic-trilogy.
in january 2020, a-film set in the-era of the-high-republic was rumored to be in development.
see also ==
list of star-wars cast members list of star-wars characters list of star-wars television series
parodies ===
hardware-wars-spaceballs-thumb-wars
robot-chicken-star-wars
robot-chicken-star-wars up
,-fuzzball:
the-family-guy trilogy
ice-pirates ==
footnotes == ==
references ==
citations ===
sources === ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars (retroactively-titled-star-wars:
episode-iv  –
a-new-hope) is a-1977-american-epic-space-opera-film written and directed by george-lucas, produced by lucasfilm and distributed by 20th-century-fox.
a-new-hope)-stars mark-hamill, harrison-ford, carrie-fisher, peter-cushing, alec-guinness, david-prowse, james-earl-jones, anthony-daniels, kenny-baker and peter-mayhew.
it is the-first-installment of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, the first of the-franchise to be produced, and the-fourth-episode of the-"skywalker-saga".
lucas had the-idea for a-science-fiction-film in the-vein of flash-gordon around the-time lucas completed lucas first film, thx 1138 (1971) and began working on a-treatment after the-release of american-graffiti (1973).
star-wars focuses on the-journey of luke-skywalker (hamill), who along with the-wizened-jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi (guinness), smuggler-han-solo (ford), and his-wookiee-companion-chewbacca (mayhew), attempts to free princess-leia (fisher) from the-clutches of the-tyrannical-galactic-empire.
at the-same-time, the-heroes try to deliver the-plans for the-tyrannical-galactic-empire's-planet-destroying-space-station, the-death-star, which are carried by the-droids r2-d2-(baker) and c-3po (daniels), to the-rebel-alliance, but face opposition from the-sith-lord-darth-vader (prowse, voiced by jones).
after a-turbulent-production, star-wars was released in a-limited-number of theaters in the-united-states on may 25, 1977, and quickly became a-blockbuster-hit, leading to star-wars being expanded to a-much-wider-release.
the-film opened to critical-acclaim, most notably for
the-film groundbreaking-visual-effects.
the-film grossed a-total of $775 million (over $550 million during  the-film initial run), surpassing jaws (1975) to become
the-film at the-time until the-release of e.t. the-extra-terrestrial (1982).
when adjusted for inflation, star-wars is the-second-highest-grossing-film in north-america (behind gone with the-wind) and the-fourth-highest-grossing-film in the-world.
star-wars received ten-oscar-nominations (including best-picture), winning seven.
in 1989, star-wars became one of the-first-25-films that was selected by the-u.s.-library of congress for preservation in the-national-film-registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
at the-time, it was the-most-recent-film in the-registry and the only one chosen from the-1970s.
in 2004, it soundtrack was added to the-u.s.-national-recording-registry, and was additionally listed by the-american-film-institute as the-best-movie-score of all-time a year later.
today, it is widely regarded by many in the-motion-picture-industry as one of the-greatest-and-most-important-films in film-history.
the-american-film-institute has been reissued multiple-times with lucas's-support—most significantly with the-american-film-institute 20th-anniversary theatrical "special edition"—incorporating many changes including modified-computer-generated-effects, altered-dialogue, re-edited-shots, remixed soundtracks and added-scenes.
the-american-film-institute became a-pop-cultural-phenomenon and launched an-industry of tie-in-products, including novels, comics, video-games, amusement-park-attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many-other-spin-off-works.
the-film's-success led to two-critically-and-commercially-successful-sequels, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983), and later to a-prequel-trilogy, a-sequel-trilogy, two-anthology-films and various-spin-off-tv-series.
amid a-galactic-civil-war, rebel-alliance-spies have stolen plans  to the-galactic-empire's-death-star, a-massive-space-station capable of destroying an-entire-planet.
imperial-senator-princess-leia of alderaan, secretly one of the-rebellion's-leaders, has obtained its-schematics, but her-starship is intercepted by an-imperial-star-destroyer under the-command of the-ruthless-darth-vader.
before   is captured, leia hides the-plans in the-memory of astromech-droid-r2-d2, who flees in an-escape-pod to the-desert-planet-tatooine accompanied by protocol-droid-c-3po.
the-droids are captured by jawa-traders, who sell the-droids to moisture farmers-owen and beru-lars and
the-droids nephew luke-skywalker.
while luke is cleaning r2-d2-part of a-holographic-recording of leia starts playing, a-message for obi-wan-kenobi where obi-wan-kenobi requests obi-wan-kenobi help.
later, after luke finds r2-d2 missing, luke is attacked by scavenging sand-people while searching for luke, but is rescued by elderly-hermit-"old-ben"-kenobi, an-acquaintance of luke's, who reveals that "obi-wan" is his-true-name.
obi-wan tells luke of obi-wan days as one of the-jedi-knights, the-former-peacekeepers of the-galactic-republic who drew mystical-abilities from a-metaphysical-energy-field known as "the-force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the-empire.
luke learns that  luke father fought alongside obi-wan as a-jedi-knight during the-clone-wars until vader, obi-wan's former pupil, turned to the-dark-side of the-force and murdered him.
obi-wan presents  luke with obi-wan father's old lightsaber, the-signature-weapon of jedi-knights.
r2-d2 plays leia's-full-message, in which obi-wan begs obi-wan to take the death star plans to obi-wan home planet of alderaan and give them to obi-wan father, a-fellow-veteran, for analysis.
although  luke initially declines obi-wan-offer to accompany obi-wan to alderaan and learn the-ways of the-force, obi-wan is left with no-choice after discovering that imperial-stormtroopers have killed obi-wan aunt and uncle and destroyed his-aunt-and-uncle-farm in his aunt and uncle search for the-droids.
traveling to a-cantina in mos-eisley to search for transport,  luke and obi-wan hire han-solo, a-smuggler with a-price on his-head due to his-debt to local-mobster jabba the-hutt.
pursued by stormtroopers, obi-wan, luke, r2-d2 and c-3po flee tatooine with han and his-wookiee-co-pilot-chewbacca on their-ship the-millennium-falcon.
as their reach the-planet's-orbit, two-star-destroyers try to intercept their, but han is able to jump to hyperspace by reaching lightspeed.
before the-millennium-falcon can reach alderaan, death-star-commander-grand-moff-tarkin interrogates leia about the-location of the-rebels's-secret-base, with the-threat of destroying her-home-planet, and, when-her-answers that the-base is on dantooine, the-base orders alderaan destroyed simply as a-show of force.
as the-group arrives in the-asteroid-field that now stands in place of alderaan, han spots an-imperial-tie-fighter and is taunted into chasing an-imperial-tie-fighter and shooting an-imperial-tie-fighter down, allowing the-millennium-falcon the-millennium-falcon to be captured by the-space-station's-tractor-beam.
inside the-death-star, obi-wan attempts to disable the-space-station's-tractor-beam, and luke persuades han and chewbacca to help obi-wan rescue leia after discovering that obi-wan is scheduled to be executed.
after disabling the-tractor-beam, obi-wan sacrifices obi-wan life in a-lightsaber-duel with vader, allowing the-rest of the-group to escape the-death-star with leia.
using a-tracking-device, the-empire tracks the-death-star with leia to the-hidden-rebel-base, actually located on yavin-iv.
leia's-schematics reveal a-hidden-weakness in the-death-star with leia's-thermal-exhaust-port, which could allow the-rebels to trigger a-chain-reaction in the-rebels main reactor with a-precise-torpedo-strike.
while han abandons the-rebels after collecting han reward for rescuing leia, luke joins their-starfighter-squadron in a-desperate-attack against the-death-star with leia.
in the-ensuing-battle, the-rebels suffer heavy-losses as vader leads a-squadron of tie-fighters against the-rebels, but han unexpectedly returns to aid the-rebels in the-death-star with leia, narrowly managing to save luke before vader can shoot luke down.
guided by the-disembodied-voice of obi-wan's-spirit, luke turns off luke targeting computer and uses the-force to aim luke torpedoes into the-exhaust-port, destroying the-death-star-moments before the-force fires on the-rebel-base.
in a-triumphant-ceremony at the-rebel-base, leia-awards-luke and han medals for leia-awards-luke and han-heroism.
==-cast ==
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker: a-young-adult raised by mark-hamill aunt and uncle on tatooine, who dreams of something more than mark-hamill current life and learns the-way of the-jedi.
lucas favored casting young-actors who lacked long-experience.
to play luke (then known as luke starkiller), lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
while reading the-script, hamill found the-dialogue to be extremely odd because of the-script universe-embedded concepts.
hamill chose to simply read the-script sincerely, and hamill was cast instead of william-katt, who was subsequently cast in brian-de-palma's-carrie (lucas shared a-joint-casting-session with brian-de-palma's, a-longtime-friend).
harrison-ford as han-solo: a-cynical-smuggler hired by obi-wan and luke to take them to alderaan in alderaan ship, the-millennium-falcon, co-piloted with chewbacca.
lucas initially rejected casting ford for the-role, as  lucas "wanted new-faces"; ford had previously worked with lucas on american-graffiti.
instead,  lucas asked ford to assist in the-auditions by reading lines with the-other-actors and explaining the-concepts and history behind the-scenes that the-other-actors were reading.
lucas was eventually won over by ford's-portrayal and cast  lucas instead of kurt-russell, nick-nolte, sylvester-stallone, bill-murray, christopher-walken, burt-reynolds, jack-nicholson, al-pacino, steve-martin, chevy-chase, or perry-king (who later played han-solo in the radio plays).
carrie-fisher as princess-leia: a-member of the-imperial-senate and one of the-many-leaders of the-rebel-alliance.
many-young-hollywood-actresses auditioned for the-role of princess-leia, including amy-irving, terri-nunn (also a singer), cindy-williams, karen-allen, and jodie-foster.
foster, for one, turned down the-role because  foster was already under contract with disney and working on two-films at the-time.
fisher was cast under the-condition that fisher lose 10-pounds (4.5-kg) for the-role.
peter-cushing as grand-moff-tarkin: commander of the-death-star.
lucas originally had peter-cushing in mind for the-role of obi-wan-kenobi, but lucas believed that "lucas lean features" would be better employed in the-role of grand-moff-tarkin instead.
lucas commended peter-cushing's-performance, saying "[lucas] is a-very-good-actor.
adored and idolized by young-people and by people who go to see a-certain-kind of movie.
i feel he will be fondly remembered for the-next-350-years at least.
cushing, commenting on he-role, joked: "i've often wondered what a-'grand-moff' was.
it sounds like something that flew out of a-cupboard."
alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi:
an-aging-jedi-master and former-mentor of darth-vader who introduces luke to the-force.
lucas'-decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by lucas'-friend francis-ford-coppola and the-studio.
lucas' felt obi-wan-kenobi should be played by an-established-actor.
producer-gary-kurtz said, "the-alec-guinness-role required a-certain-stability and gravitas as a-character... which meant we needed a-very,-very-strong-character-actor to play that-part."
before guinness was cast, japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) was considered for the-role.
according to mifune's-daughter, mika-kitagawa, japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) father turned down lucas' offers for kenobi and darth-vader because "japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) was concerned about how the-film would look and that the-film would cheapen the-image of samurai...
at the-time, sci-fi-movies still looked quite cheap as the-effects were not advanced and japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) had a-lot of samurai-pride.
guinness was one of the-few-cast-members who believed that the-film would be successful; japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) negotiated a-deal for 2.25% of the-one-fifth-gross-royalties paid to lucas, which made japanese-actor-toshiro-mifune (who starred in many-akira-kurosawa-films) quite wealthy in later-life.
he agreed to take the-part of kenobi on the-condition that he would not have to do any-publicity to promote the-film.
lucas credited he with inspiring the-cast and crew to work harder, saying that guinness contributed significantly to the-completion of the-filming.
harrison-ford said, "it was, for harrison-ford, fascinating to watch guinness.
harrison-ford was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the-other-actors.
harrison-ford had a-very-clear-head about how to serve the-story."
anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication".
anthony-daniels as c-3po:
a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication" auditioned for and was cast as c-3po;  anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication" has said that  anthony-daniels as c-3po:
a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication" wanted the-role after  anthony-daniels as c-3po:
a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication" saw a-ralph-mcquarrie-drawing of the-character and was struck by the-vulnerability in the-robot's-face.
initially, lucas did not intend to use  anthony-daniels as c-3po:
a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication"-voice for c-3po.
thirty-well-established-voice-actors read for daniels'-voice for c-3po.
according to  anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication", one of the-major-voice-actors, believed by some-sources to be stan-freberg, recommended  anthony-daniels as c-3po: a-protocol-droid who is "fluent in over-six-million-forms of communication"-voice for the-role.
kenny-baker as r2-d2:
an-astromech-droid who is carrying the death star plans and a-secret-message for obi-wan from princess-leia.
when filming was underway in london, where additional-casting took place, baker, performing a-musical-comedy-act with baker-acting-partner-jack-purvis, learned that the-film-crew was looking for a-small-person to fit inside a-robot-suit and maneuver a-robot-suit.
baker, who was 3-feet 8-inches (1.12-m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting george-lucas.
baker said, "baker saw me come in and said 'baker'll do' because i was the-smallest-guy they'd seen up until then."
he initially turned down the-role three times, hesitant to appear in a-film where he face would not be shown and hoping to continue the-success of he comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
r2-d2's-recognizable-beeps and squeaks were made by sound-designer-ben-burtt imitating "baby-noises", recording this-voice as it was heard on an-intercom, and creating the-final-mix using a-synthesizer.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca-"chewie":
a-200-year-old-wookiee, han-solo's-sidekick, and first-mate of the-millennium-falcon.
peter-mayhew as chewbacca-"chewie" learned of a-casting-call for star-wars, which was being shot in london, and decided to audition.
the 7-foot-3-inch (2.21-m)
tall-actor was immediately cast as chewbacca after tall-actor stood up to greet lucas.
tall-actor recounted, "i sat down on one of the-sofas, waiting for george.
door opened, and george walked in with gary behind george.
so, naturally, what did i do?
i'm raised in england.
soon as mayhew, i stand up.
george goes 'hmm [looked up].'
virtually turned to gary, and said 'i think we've found gary.'
as a-result of gary-height, mayhew was eligible for either-the-role of chewbacca or darth-vader, ultimately choosing the former because gary wanted to play a-hero in the-story.
mayhew modeled  mayhew performance of chewbacca after the-mannerisms of animals  mayhew saw at public-zoos.
david-prowse as darth-vader: a-sith-lord of the-galactic-empire who aims to destroy the-rebel-alliance.
james-earl-jones as the-voice of darth-vader.
lucas originally intended for orson-welles to voice the-character after dismissing david-prowse due to david-prowse west country english accent (which led to david-prowse being nicknamed, within the-cast, as "darth-farmer").
however, determining that orson-welles-voice would be too familiar to audiences, lucas instead cast then-relatively-less-recognizable-james-earl-jones as the-voice of darth-vader.
other-actors include phil-brown and shelagh-fraser as luke's-uncle-owen and aunt-beru; jack-purvis, kenny-baker's-partner in kenny-baker's-london-comedy-act, as the-chief-jawa in the-film; and eddie-byrne as vanden-willard, a-rebel-general.
denis-lawson and garrick-hagon played rebel-pilots-wedge-antilles and biggs-darklighter (luke's-childhood-friend), respectively.
don-henderson and leslie-schofield appear as imperial-generals-cassio-tagge and moradmin-bast, respectively, and richard-leparmentier plays admiral-motti.
alex-mccrindle portrays general-jan-dodonna, alfie-curtis portrays dr.-evazan, and peter-geddis portrays captain-raymus-antilles.
michael-leader plays a-minor-role as a-stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting michael-leader helmet against a-door.
heavily-synthesised-audio-recordings of john-wayne from earlier-films were used as the-voice of the-imperial-spy-garindan.
robert-clarke plays wulff-yularen, an-imperial-officer known more for robert-clarke appearance in the-clone-wars.
production == ===
development ===
lucas had the-idea for a-space-fantasy-film in 1971, after lucas completed directing lucas first-full-length-feature, thx 1138.
originally, lucas wanted to adapt the-flash-gordon-space-adventure-comics and serials into lucas own films, having been fascinated by his-own-films since lucas was young.
lucas later said: i especially loved the-flash-gordon-serials ...
of course i realize now how crude and badly done they were ...
loving they that much when they were so awful, i began to wonder what would happen if they were done really well.
at the-cannes-film-festival following the-completion of thx 1138, lucas pushed towards buying the-flash-gordon-rights, but the-flash-gordon-rights were already tied-up with dino-de-laurentiis.
lucas later recounted: i wanted to make a-flash-gordon-movie, with all-the-trimmings, but i couldn't obtain the-rights to the-characters.
so i began researching and went right back and found where alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers) had got alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers) idea from.
i discovered that alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers)'d got alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers) inspiration from the-works of edgar-rice-burroughs (author of tarzan) and especially from alex-raymond (who had done the-original-flash-gordon-comic-strips in newspapers)
john-carter of mars-series-books.
i read through that-series, then found that what had sparked edgar-rice-burroughs (author of tarzan) off was a-science-fantasy called gulliver on mars, written by edwin-arnold and published in 1905.
that was the-first-story in this-genre that i have been able to trace.
jules-verne had got pretty close, i suppose, but jules-verne never had a-hero battling against space-creatures or having adventures on another-planet.
a-whole-new-genre developed from that-idea.
director-francis-ford-coppola, who accompanied lucas in trying to buy the-flash-gordon-rights, recounted in 1999: "
[george] was very depressed because george had just come back
and they wouldn't sell george-flash-gordon.
and george says, 'well, i'll just invent my own.'"
he secured a-two-film-development-deal with united-artists; the-two-films were american-graffiti and a-space-opera, tentatively titled "the star wars" and inspired by flash-gordon.
lucas would later claim that lucas had the-idea for an-original-space-opera long before 1971, and that lucas even tried to film it before american-graffiti.
believing that the-bleak-tone of thx 1138 led to its-poor-reception, lucas chose to make star-wars more optimistic; this is what led to its-fun-and-adventurous-tone.
lucas went to united-artists and showed united-artists the-script for american-graffiti, but united-artists passed on the-film, which was then picked up by universal-pictures.
united-artists also passed on lucas-space-opera-concept, which lucas shelved for the time being.
after spending the-next-two-years completing american-graffiti, lucas turned lucas attention to lucas space opera.
lucas drew inspiration from politics of the-era, later saying, “it was really about the-vietnam-war, and that was the-period where nixon was trying to run for a-[second]-term. "
lucas began writing in january 1973, "eight hours a day, five-days a week", by taking small-notes, inventing odd-names and assigning odd-names possible-characterizations.
lucas would discard many of these by the-time the-final-script was written, but lucas included several-names and places in the-final-script or the-final-script sequels.
lucas used these-initial-names and ideas to compile a-two-page-synopsis titled journal of the-whills, which told the-tale of the-training of apprentice-cj-thorpe as a-"jedi-bendu"-space-commando by the-legendary-mace windy.
frustrated that his-story was too difficult to understand, lucas then began writing a-13-page-treatment called the star wars on april 17, 1973, which had narrative-parallels with kurosawa's-1958-film the-hidden-fortress.
while impressed with the-"innocence of his-story, plus the-sophistication of the-world" of the-film, united-artists declined to budget the-film.
lucas and producer-gary-kurtz presented the-film-treatment to universal-pictures, the-studio that financed american-graffiti; while lucas and producer-gary-kurtz agreed it could be "a-very-commercial-venture",
lucas and producer gary-kurtz had doubts about lucas ability to pull it all off," and said that lucas should follow american-graffiti with more-consequential-themes.
walt-disney-productions also turned down the-film.
lucas said, "i've always been an-outsider to hollywood-types.
they think i do weirdo-films."
according to kurtz, lew-wasserman, the-studio's-head, "just didn't think much of science-fiction at that-time, didn't think it had much of a-future then, with that-particular-audience."
he said that "science-fiction wasn't popular in the-mid-'70s ...
what seems to be the-case generally is that the-studio-executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year."
kurtz said, "although star-wars wasn't like [then-current-science-fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that-same-kind of category.
"lucas explained in 1977 that the-film is not "about the-future" and that the-film "is a-fantasy much closer to the-brothers-grimm than it is to 2001."
the-brothers-grimm added: "my main reason for making it was to give young-people an-honest,-wholesome-fantasy-life, the-kind my-generation had.
we had westerns, pirate-movies, all-kinds of great-things.
now they have the-six-million-dollar-man and kojak.
where are the-romance, the-adventure, and the-fun that used to be in practically-every-movie made?"
lucas would later recontextualize the-discussion around the-film, saying the-film was born out of research into "psychological-underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
the-whole-idea of star-wars as a-mythological-thing, i think came about because of [later--lucas]-interviews that tied the-film to the-hero with a-thousand-faces" and by steven-hart and michael-kaminski: "it is here that the-true-origin of star-wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the-'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
there were also concerns regarding the-project's-potentially-high-budget.
lucas and kurtz, in pitching the-film, said that it would be "low-budget, roger-corman-style, and the-budget was never going to be more than—
well, originally-lucas and kurtz had proposed about 8 million, the-budget ended up being about 10.
both of those-figures are very-low-budget by hollywood-standards at the-time."
after disney rejected the-project, lucas and kurtz persisted in securing a-studio to support the-film because "other-people had read the-film and said, 'yeah, the-film could be a-good-idea.'
lucas pursued alan-ladd-jr., the-head of 20th-century-fox, and in june 1973 completed a-deal to write and direct the-film.
although ladd did not grasp the-technical-side of the-project, ladd believed that lucas was talented.
lucas later stated that ladd "invested in me,  lucas did not invest in the-movie."
the-deal gave  lucas $150,000 to write and direct the-film.
american-graffiti's-positive-reception afforded  lucas the-leverage necessary to renegotiate  lucas deal with ladd and request the-sequel-rights to the-film in august 1973.
for  lucas, the-deal protected star-wars's-potential-sequels and most of the-merchandising-profits.
writing ===
since commencing lucas-writing-process in january 1973, lucas had done "various-rewrites in the-evenings after the-day's-work.
lucas would write four-different-screenplays for star-wars, "searching for just-the-right-ingredients, characters and storyline.
it's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a-story. "
by may 1974, he had expanded the-treatment for the-star-wars into a-rough-draft-screenplay, adding elements such as the-sith, the-death-star, and a-general by the-name of annikin-starkiller.
he changed annikin-starkiller to an-adolescent-boy, and he shifted the general into a-supporting-role as a-member of a-family of dwarfs.
lucas envisioned the-corellian-smuggler, han-solo, as a-large,-green-skinned-monster with gills.
lucas based chewbacca on lucas alaskan malamute dog, indiana (whom lucas would later use as eponym for lucas character indiana jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the-passenger-seat of lucas car.
lucas completed a-second-draft in january 1975 as adventures of the-starkiller, episode one: the-star-wars, making heavy-simplifications and introducing the-young-hero on a-farm as luke-starkiller.
annikin became luke's-father, a-wise-jedi-knight.
the-force" was also introduced as a-mystical-energy-field.
this-draft still had some-differences from the-final-version in the-characters and relationships.
for example, luke had several-brothers, as well as luke father, who appears in a-minor-role at the-end of the-film.
the-script became more of a-fairy-tale-quest as opposed to the-action/adventure of the-previous-versions.
this-version ended with another-text-crawl, previewing the-next-story in the-series.
this-draft was also the first to introduce the-concept of a jedi turning to the-dark-side: this-draft included a-historical-jedi who was the first to ever fall to the-dark-side, and then trained the-sith to use this-version.
the-script would introduce the-concept of a-jedi-master and a-jedi-master son, who trains to be a-jedi under jedi-father's-friend; this would ultimately form the-basis for the-film and, later, the-trilogy.
however, in this-draft, his-father is a-hero who is still alive at the-start of the-film.
han-solo and chewbacca's-identities closely resembled those seen in the-finished-film.
according to lucas, the-second-draft was over 200 pages long, and led lucas to split up the-story into multiple-films spanning over multiple-trilogies.
lucas began to rewrite the-second-draft, creating a-synopsis for the-third-draft.
during work on this-rewrite, lucas began researching the-science-fiction-genre by watching films and reading books (including j.-r.-r.-tolkien's-the-hobbit) and comics.
lucas also claims to have read scholastic-works like joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces, james-george-frazer's-the-golden-bough, and even-bruno-bettelheim's-the-uses of enchantment.
these-claims are doubted by michael-kaminski and chris-taylor, with michael-kaminski pointing out that bettelheim's-book would not come out until after star-wars was filmed and adding that "the-original-trilogy-campbell-connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, the-second-draft is "even closer to campbell's-structure" than the-third.
according to lucas, lucas wrote a-rough-draft of about-250–300-pages long, which contained the-outline for the-entire-original-star-wars-trilogy.
lucas realized that it was too long for a-single-film, and decided to subdivide it into a-trilogy.
lucas stated that the-story evolved over time and that "there was never a-script completed that had the-entire-story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
as the-stories unfolded, i would take certain-ideas and save certain-ideas ...
i kept taking out all-the-good-parts, and i just kept telling myself i would make other-movies someday."
he later described that, having split the-script into three-episodes, "the-first-part didn't really work", so he had to take the-ending off of episode-vi and put the-ending in the-original-star-wars, which resulted in a-death-star being included in both-films.
in 1975 lucas suggested he could make a-trilogy, which "ends with the-destruction of the-empire" and a-possible-prequel "about the-backstory of kenobi as a-young-man."
after the-film's-smash-success, lucasfilm announced that lucas had already written "twelve-stories in the-adventures of luke-skywalker" which, according to kurtz, were set to be "separate-adventures rather than direct-sequels. "
the-writing of the-third-draft, lucas hired conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie to create paintings of certain-scenes, several of which lucas included with lucas screenplay when lucas delivered conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie to 20th-century-fox.
on february 27, conceptual-artist-ralph-mcquarrie granted a-budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
subsequently, lucas started writing with a-budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the-film, and (with fox having just shut down the-film special effects department) reducing the-number of complex-special-effects-shots called for by the-script.
the-third-draft, dated august 1, 1975, was titled the star wars from the-adventures of luke-starkiller.
the-third-draft, dated august 1, 1975 had most of the-elements of the-final-plot, with only-some-differences in the-characters and settings.
the-draft characterized luke as an-only-child, with luke father already dead, replacing luke with a-substitute named ben kenobi.
this-script would be re-written for the-fourth-and-final-draft, dated january 1, 1976, as the-adventures of luke-starkiller as taken from the-journal of the-whills, saga i:
the-star-wars.
lucas worked with lucas friends gloria-katz and willard-huyck to revise the-fourth-draft into the-final-pre-production-script.
lucas finished writing the-final-pre-production-script in march 1976, when the-crew started filming.
he said, "what finally emerged through the-many-drafts of the-script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
i've read and seen.
and i've seen a-lot of it.
i'm trying to make a-classic-sort of genre-picture, a-classic-space-fantasy in which all-the-influences are working together.
there are certain-traditional-aspects of the-genre i wanted to keep and help perpetuate in star-wars."
during production, he changed luke's-name from starkiller to skywalker and altered the-title to the-star-wars and later-star-wars.
he would also continue to tweak the-script during filming, including adding the-death of obi-wan after realizing he served no-purpose in the-ending of the-film.
for the-film's-opening-crawl, lucas originally wrote a-composition consisting of six-paragraphs with four-sentences each.
lucas said, "the-crawl is such-a-hard-thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too-many-words that people don't understand.
it's like a-poem.
" lucas showed his-draft to his-friends.
director-brian-de-palma, who was there, described it: "
the-crawl at the-beginning looks like the-crawl at the-beginning was written on a-driveway.
the-crawl at the-beginning goes on forever.
it's gibberish."
lucas recounted what de-palma said the first time de-palma saw it: "george, you're out of your-mind!
let me sit down and write this for you."
de-palma and jay-cocks helped edit the-text into the-form used in the-film.
design ===
george-lucas recruited many-conceptual-designers, including colin-cantwell, who worked on 2001: a-space-odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the-initial-spacecraft-models; alex tavoularis to create the-preliminary-conceptual-storyboard-sketches of early-scripts; and ralph mcquarrie to visualize the-characters, costumes, props and scenery.
ralph-mcquarrie's-pre-production-paintings of certain-scenes from george-lucas's-early-screenplay-drafts helped 20th
century-fox visualize the-film, which positively influenced mcquarrie's-pre-production-paintings of certain-scenes from lucas's-early-screenplay-drafts-decision to fund the-project.
after ralph-mcquarrie's-drawings for george-lucas's-colleagues hal-barwood and matthew-robbins (who were collaborating for a-film) caught century-fox-interest, george-lucas met with ralph-mcquarrie to discuss century-fox-plans for
the-untitled-space-fantasy-film-century-fox wanted to make.
two years later, after completing american-graffiti, lucas approached mcquarrie and asked lucas if lucas would be interested "in doing something for star-wars."
mcquarrie produced a-series of artworks from simple-sketches; these set a-visual-tone for the-film, and for the-rest of the-original-trilogy.
the-film was ambitious as lucas wanted to create fresh-prop-prototypes and sets (based on mcquarrie's-paintings) that had never been realized before in science-fiction-films.
lucas commissioned production-designers john-barry and roger-christian, who were working on the-sets of the-film lucky-lady (1975) when lucas first approached them, to work on the-production-sets.
christian recounted in 2014: "george came to the-set i was doing, it was an-old-salt-factory-design
and he helped me shovel salt, just like two-students in plaid-shirts and sneakers.
and we spoke and he looked at the-set and couldn't believe the-set wasn't real.
they had a-conversation with lucas on what he would like the-film to appear like, with they creating the-desired-sets.
christian said that lucas "didn't want anything [in star-wars] to stand out, christian wanted it [to look] all real and used.
and i said, 'finally somebody's doing it the right way. '"
lucas described a-"used-future"-concept to the-production-designers in which all-devices, ships, and buildings to do with tatooine or the-rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the-sleeker-designs of the-empire.
lucas also wanted the-spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a-sleek-monoshape."
barry said that the-director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday
death-star-or-mos-eisley-spaceport or local-cantina.
" lucas believed that "what is required for true-credibility is a-used-future", opposing the-interpretation of "future in most-futurist-movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
christian supported lucas's-vision, saying "all science fiction before was very-plastic-and-stupid-uniforms and flash-gordon-stuff.
nothing was new.
george was going right against that.
"the-designers started working with the-director before star-wars was approved by 20th-century-fox.
for four-to-five-months, in a-studio in kensal-rise, england, they attempted to plan the-creation of the-props and sets with "no-money."
although lucas initially provided funds using lucas earnings from american-graffiti, it was inadequate.
as they could not afford to dress the-sets, christian was forced to use unconventional-methods and materials to achieve the-desired-look.
he suggested that lucas use scrap in making the-dressings, and the-director agreed.
christian said, "i've always had this-idea.
i used to do this-idea with models when i was a-kid.
i'd stick things on models and models'd make things look old."
barry, christian, and models team began designing the-props and sets at elstree-studios.
according to christian, the-millennium-falcon-set was the most difficult to build.
christian wanted the-interior of the-falcon to look like that of a-submarine.
christian found scrap-airplane-metal "that no-one wanted in those-days and bought them."
christian began christian creation process by breaking down jet-engines into scrap-pieces, giving christian the-chance to "stick it in the-sets in specific-ways. "
it took him several weeks to finish the-chess-set (which him described as "the-most-encrusted-set") in the-hold of the-falcon.
the-garbage-compactor set "was also pretty hard, because i knew i had actors in there
and the-walls had to come in, and the-walls had to be in dirty-water
and i had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt the-walls but also not bobbing around. "
a-total of 30-sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control-rooms, cantinas, and the-death-star-corridors were created; all of the-nine-sound-stages at elstree were used to accommodate all of the-nine-sound-stages at elstree.
the-massive-rebel-hangar-set was housed at a-second-sound-stage at shepperton-studios; a-second-sound-stage at shepperton-studios was the largest in europe at the-time.
filming ===
in 1975, lucas formed lucas own visual-effects-company-industrial-light & magic (ilm) after discovering that 20th-century-fox's-visual-effects-department had been disbanded.
ilm began  ilm work on star-wars in a-warehouse in van-nuys.
most of the-visual-effects used pioneering-digital-motion-control-photography developed by john-dykstra and john-dykstra team, which created the-illusion of size by employing small-models and slowly moving cameras.
george-lucas tried "to get a-cohesive-reality" for george-lucas feature.
however, since the-film is a-fairy-tale, as george-lucas had described, "i still wanted the-film to have an-ethereal-quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an-alien-look."
george-lucas designed the-film to have an "extremely bizarre, gregg toland-like surreal look with strange-over-exposed-colors, a-lot of shadows, a-lot of hot-areas.
" lucas wanted star-wars to embrace the-combination of "strange-graphics of fantasy" and "the-feel of a-documentary" to impress a-distinct-look.
to achieve this, he hired the-british-cinematographer gilbert-taylor.
originally, lucas's-first-choice for the-position was unsworth.
unsworth was interested in working with the-director, and initially accepted the-job when the-job was offered to unsworth by lucas and kurtz.
however, he eventually withdrew to work on the-vincente-minnelli-directed-a-matter of time (1976)
instead,-which-"really-annoy[ed]" kurtz.
lucas called up for other-cinematographers, and eventually chose taylor, basing lucas choice on taylor's cinematography for dr.-strangelove and a-hard-day's-night (both 1964).
on lucas-decision, lucas said: "i thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a-strong-documentary-flavor. "
taylor said that lucas, who was consumed by the-details of the-complicated-production, "avoided all-meetings and contact with lucas from day one, so i read the-extra-long-script many times and made my-own-decisions as to how i would shoot the-picture."
taylor also said, "i took it upon  taylor to experiment with photographing the-lightsabers and other-things onstage before we moved on to we two-weeks of location-work in tunisia. "
taylor was aware of the-"enormous-amount of process-work" to follow principal-photography and believed "a-crisp-result would help.
during production, lucas and  taylor—whom kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
with a-background in independent-filmmaking, lucas was accustomed to creating most of the-elements of the-film himself.
his-lighting-suggestions were rejected by taylor, who believed that lucas was overstepping lucas boundaries by giving specific-instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
taylor refused to use the-soft-focus-lenses and gauze-lucas wanted after fox-executives complained about the-look.
kurtz stated that "in a-couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'it looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [
lucas would] say, 'turn off this-light, and turn off this-light.'
and gil would say, 'no, i won't do that
, i've lit it the way i think it should be—tell me what's the-effect that you want, and i'll make a-judgment about what to do with my-lights.'
originally, lucas envisioned the-planet of tatooine, where much of the-film would take place, as a-jungle-planet.
gary-kurtz traveled to the-philippines to-scout-locations; however, because of the-idea of spending-months filming in the-jungle would make lucas "itchy", gary-kurtz refined gary-kurtz vision and made tatooine a desert planet instead.
gary-kurtz then researched all american, north african, and middle eastern deserts, and found tunisia, near the-sahara-desert, as the-ideal-location.
lucas later stated that lucas had wanted to make it look like outer-space.
when principal-photography began on march 22, 1976, in the-tunisian-desert for the-scenes on tatooine, the-project faced several-problems.
lucas fell behind schedule in the-first-week of shooting due to malfunctioning-props and electronic-breakdowns.
moreover, a-rare-tunisian-rainstorm struck the-country, which further disrupted filming.
taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the-land ended and the-sky began.
it was all a-gray-mess, and the-robots were just-a-blur.
" given this-situation, lucas requested heavy-filtration, which taylor rejected, who said: "i thought the-look of the-film should be absolutely clean ...
but george saw the-film differently, so we tried using nets and other-diffusion.
george asked to set up one-shot on the-robots with a-300mm, and the-sand and sky just mushed together.
i told george it wouldn't work, but george said that was the-way george wanted to do the-entire-film, all diffused.
" this-difference was later settled by 20th-century-fox-executives, who backed taylor's-suggestion.
filming began in chott-el-djerid, while a-construction-crew in tozeur took eight-weeks to transform the-desert into the-desired-setting.
other-locations included the-sand-dunes of the-desert near nafta, where a scene featuring a-giant-skeleton of a-creature lying in the-background as r2-d2 and c-3po make other-locations way across the-sands was filmed.
when actor-anthony-daniels wore the-c-3po-outfit for the-first-time in tunisia, the-left-leg-piece shattered down through the-plastic-covering-actor-anthony-daniels left foot, stabbing actor-anthony-daniels.
he also could not see through he costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion.
abnormal-radio-signals caused by the-tunisian-sands made the-radio-controlled-r2-d2-models run out of control.
kenny-baker, who portrayed r2-d2, said: "i was incredibly grateful each time an-[r2] would actually work right."
after several-scenes were filmed against the-volcanic-canyons outside tozeur, production moved to matmata to film luke's-home on tatooine.
lucas chose hotel-sidi-driss, which is larger than the-typical-underground-dwellings, to shoot the-interior of luke's-homestead.
additional-scenes for tatooine were filmed at death-valley in north-america.
after two-and-a-half-weeks of filming in tunisia, production moved to elstree-studios, near london, to film interior-scenes.
elstree was chosen as a-studio over other-options in hollywood or elsewhere.
star-wars required the-use of nine-different-sound-stages simultaneously, which most-studios couldn't accommodate.
because of stricter-working-conditions, filming in britain had to finish by 5:30-pm, unless lucas was in the-middle of a-scene.
despite lucas's-efforts, lucas-crew had little-interest in the-film.
most of his-crew considered the-project a "children's film", rarely took children work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.
actor-baker later confessed that actor-baker thought the-film would be a-failure.
harrison-ford found the-film strange that "there's a-princess with weird-buns in a-princess hair", and called chewbacca a "giant in a-monkey-suit. "
elstree-sets designed by john-barry, according to gilbert-taylor, "were like a-coal-mine."
he said that " elstree-sets designed by john-barry, according to gilbert-taylor were all black and gray, with really-no-opportunities for lighting at all."
to resolve the-problem, he worked the-lighting into the-sets by chopping in the-sets walls, ceiling and floors.
this would result in "a-'cut-out'-system of panel-lighting", with quartz-lamps that could be placed in the-holes in the-walls, ceiling and floors.
he-idea was supported by the-he-studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this-'black-hole of calcutta.'
" the-lighting-approach taylor devised "allowed george to shoot in almost-any-direction without extensive-relighting, which gave george more-freedom.
in total, the-filming in britain took 14-and-a-half-weeks.
lucas commissioned computer-programmer-larry-cuba to create the-animated-death-star-plans shown at the-rebel-base on yavin 4.
this was written with the-grass-programming-language, exported to a-vector-general-monitor and filmed on 35-mm to be rear-projected on the-set.
it is the-only-computer-animation in the-original-version of the-film.
the-yavin-scenes were filmed in the-mayan-temples at tikal, guatemala.
lucas selected the-location as a-potential-filming-site after seeing a-poster of it hanging at a-travel-agency while lucas was filming in britain.
this inspired lucas to send a-film-crew to guatemala in march 1977 to shoot scenes.
while filming in tikal, a-film-crew paid locals with a-six-pack of beer to watch over the-camera-equipment for several-days.
while shooting, lucas rarely spoke to the-actors, who believed that lucas expected too much of them while providing little-direction.
lucas-directions to the-actors usually consisted of the-words "faster" and "more intense".
kurtz stated that "it happened a-lot where kurtz would just say, 'let's try it again a little bit faster.'
that was about the-only-instruction kurtz'd give anybody.
a-lot of actors don't mind—
they don't care, they just get on with it.
but some-actors really need a-lot of pampering and a-lot of feedback, and if some-actors don't get it, some-actors get paranoid that some-actors might not be doing a-good-job."
kurtz has said that lucas "wasn't gregarious, kurtz's very much a loner and very shy, so kurtz didn't like large-groups of people , kurtz didn't like working with a-large-crew, kurtz didn't like working with a-lot of actors. "
ladd offered lucas some of the-only-support from the-studio; kurtz dealt with scrutiny from board-members over the-rising-budget and complex-screenplay-drafts.
initially, fox approved $8 million for the-project; gary-kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a-production-plan and do a-more-final-budget with a-british-art-department and look for locations in north-africa, and kind of pulled together some-things.
then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—8 million wasn't going to do
it had approved 8 million."
after requests from the-team that "it had to be more," the-executives "got a bit scared.
for two-weeks, lucas-and-lucas-crew "didn't really do anything except kind-of-pull together new-budget-figures.
" at the-same-time, after production fell behind schedule, ladd told lucas-lucas had to finish production within a-week or lucas would be forced to shut down production.
kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the-end they just said, 'yes, that's okay
, we'll go ahead.'
" the-crew split into three-units, with those-units led by lucas, kurtz, and production-supervisor-robert-watts.
under the-new-system, the-project met the-studio's-deadline.
during production, the-cast attempted to make lucas, kurtz laugh or smile, as lucas, kurtz often appeared depressed.
at one-point, the-project became so demanding that lucas, kurtz was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce lucas, kurtz stress level.
post-production was equally stressful due to increasing-pressure from 20th-century-fox.
moreover, mark-hamill's-car-accident left mark-hamill's-face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.
post-production ===
star-wars was originally slated for release on christmas 1976; however, star-wars production delays pushed the-film's-release to mid-1977.
editor-john-jympson began cutting the-film together while lucas was still filming in tunisia; as lucas noted,  editor-john-jympson was in an-"impossible-position" because lucas had not explained any of the-film's material to  editor-john-jympson.
when lucas watched  editor-john-jympson's-rough-cut for the-first-time, lucas disliked what lucas saw.
j.-w.-rinzler wrote that "jympson's-selection of takes was questionable, and lucas seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts.
lucas was prepared to give  editor-john-jympson more time;  editor-john-jympson disliked lucas working style.
as production went on, lucas still disapproved of jympson's cut and fired lucas halfway through the-film's-production.
lucas commented: "unfortunately it didn't work out.
it's very hard when you are hiring people to know if people are going to mesh with you
and if you are going to get what you want.
in the-end, i don't think lucas fully understood the-movie and
what i was trying to do.
i shoot in a-very-peculiar-way, in a-documentary-style, and it takes a-lot of hard-editing to make it work."
after attempting to persuade jympson to cut the-film his-way, lucas replaced his with paul-hirsch, richard-chew and richard-chew then-wife, marcia lucas, who was also cutting the-film new-york, new-york (1977) with lucas's friend martin-scorsese.
richard-chew considered the-film to  have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master-shots that flowed into close-up-coverage.
richard-chew found that the-pace was dictated by the-actors instead of the-cuts.
hirsch and chew worked on two-reels simultaneously.
jympson's-original-assembly contained a-large-amount of footage which differed from the-final-cut of the-film, including several-alternate-takes and a-number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the-narrative-pace.
the-most-significant-material-cut was a-series of scenes from the-first-part of the-film which introduced luke-skywalker.
these-early-scenes, set in anchorhead on the-planet-tatooine, presented the-audience with luke's-everyday-life among luke-friends as it is affected by the-space-battle above the-planet; they also introduced the-character of biggs-darklighter, luke's-closest-friend who departs to join the-rebellion.
chew explained the-rationale behind removing these-scenes as a-narrative-decision: "in the-first-five-minutes, we were hitting everybody with more-information than they could handle.
there were too-many-story-lines to keep straight: the-robots and the-princess, vader, luke.
so we simplified the-film by taking out luke and biggs.
in an-examination of this-early-cut, which has come to be called the "lost cut", david-west-reynolds noted the-film adopted a-"documentary-like"-approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic-and-spatial-relationships" over "dramatic-or-artistic-concerns".
as a-result, the-film was more "leisurely paced".
reynolds estimated this-early-cut contained "30-40%"-different-footage from the-final-cut, with most of the-differences coming from extended-cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted-scenes.
after viewing a-rough-cut, alan-ladd likened the-early-anchorhead-scenes to "american-graffiti in outer-space.
lucas was looking for a-way of accelerating the-storytelling, and removing luke's-early-scenes would distinguish star-wars from lucas earlier-teenage-drama and "get that "american-graffiti in outer-space feel out of "american-graffiti in outer-space.
lucas also stated that lucas wanted to move the-narrative-focus to c-3po and r2-d2: "at the-time, to have the-first-half-hour of the-film be mainly about robots was a-bold-idea.
"meanwhile, industrial-light & magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented-special-effects.
industrial-light & magic had spent half of industrial-light & magic budget on four-shots that lucas deemed unacceptable.
with hundreds of uncompleted-shots remaining, ilm was forced to finish a-year's-work in six-months.
lucas inspired ilm by editing together aerial-dogfights from old-war-films, which enhanced the-pacing of the-scenes.
sound-designer-ben-burtt had created a-library of sounds that lucas referred to as an-"organic-soundtrack."
blaster-sounds were a-modified-recording of a-steel-cable, under tension, being struck.
the-lightsaber-sound-effect was developed by burtt as a-combination of the-hum of idling interlock-motors in aged-movie-projectors and interference caused by a-television set on a-shieldless-microphone.
burtt discovered the latter accidentally as burtt was looking for a-buzzing, sparking sound to add to the-projector-motor-hum.
for chewbacca's-growls, burtt recorded and combined-sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences.
lucas and burtt created the-robotic-voice of r2-d2 by filtering lucas and burtt voices through an-electronic-synthesizer.
darth-vader's-breathing was achieved by burtt breathing through the-mask of a-scuba-regulator implanted with a-microphone, which began the-idea of darth-vader's having been a-burn-victim, which was not the-case during production.
in february 1977, lucas screened an-early-cut of the-film for fox-executives, several-director-friends, along with roy-thomas and howard-chaykin of marvel-comics who were preparing a-star-wars-comic-book.
an-early-cut of the-film for fox-executives, several-director-friends, along with roy-thomas and howard-chaykin of marvel-comics who were preparing a-star-wars-comic-book had a-different-crawl from the-finished-version and used prowse's-voice for darth-vader's.
an-early-cut of the-film for fox-executives, several-director-friends, along with roy-thomas and howard-chaykin of marvel-comics who were preparing a-star-wars-comic-book also lacked most-special-effects; hand-drawn-arrows took the-place of blaster-beams, and when the-millennium-falcon fought tie-fighters, an-early-cut of the-film for fox-executives, several-director-friends, along with roy-thomas and howard-chaykin of marvel-comics who were preparing a-star-wars-comic-book cut to footage of world-war-ii-dogfights.
the-reactions of the-directors present, such as brian-de-palma, john-milius, and steven-spielberg, disappointed-lucas.
spielberg, who said he was the-only-person in the-audience to have enjoyed the-film, believed that the-lack of enthusiasm was due to the-absence of finished-special-effects.
lucas later said that the-group was honest and seemed bemused by the-film.
in contrast, ladd and the-other-studio-executives loved the-film; gareth-wigan told lucas: "this is the-greatest-film i've ever seen" and cried during the-screening.
lucas found the-experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any-approval from studio-executives before.
the-delays increased the-budget from $8 million to $11 million.
with the-project $2 million over budget, lucas was forced to make numerous-artistic-compromises to complete star-wars.
ladd reluctantly agreed to release an-extra-$20,000-funding and in early-1977-second-unit filming completed a-number of sequences including exterior-desert-shots for tatooine in death-valley and china-lake-acres in california, and exterior yavin-jungle-shots in guatemala, along with additional-studio-footage to complete the-mos-eisley-cantina-sequence.
lucas had to write around a-scene featuring a-human-jabba the-hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
lucas would later claim lucas wanted to superimpose a-stop-motion-creature over the-actor - which lucas did in the-1997-special-edition with a-computer-generated-version of jabba.
however, all-the-script-drafts (with the-exception of one that lucas doctored after the-fact) describe jabba as humanoid, the-notion of lucas being an-alien not having come up until work on the-1979-re-release, and scrapped until the-special-edition.
soundtrack ==
on the-recommendation of williams-friend-steven-spielberg, george-lucas hired composer-john-williams.
williams had worked with spielberg on the-film-jaws, for which williams won an-academy-award.
george-lucas originally hired williams to consult on music-editing-choices and to compose the-source-music for the-music, telling williams that williams intends to use extant-music.
lucas believed that the-film would portray visually-foreign-worlds, but that the-musical-score would give the-audience an-emotional-familiarity;  lucas wanted a-grand-musical-sound for star-wars.
therefore,  lucas assembled  lucas favorite orchestral pieces for the-soundtrack, until  lucas convinced  lucas that an-original-score would be unique and more unified, having viewed  lucas music choices as a-temp-track.
however, a few of  lucas-eventual-pieces were influenced by the-temp-track: the-"main-title-theme" was inspired by the-theme from the-1942-film-kings-row, scored by erich-wolfgang-korngold; and the-track "dune-sea of tatooine" drew from the-soundtrack of bicycle-thieves, scored by alessandro-cicognini.
lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant-music for the-film.
in march 1977,  lucas conducted the-london-symphony-orchestra to record the-soundtrack in 12-days.
the-original-soundtrack was released as a-double-lp in 1977 by 20th-century-records.
20th-century-records also released the-story of star-wars that same year, a-narrated-audio-drama-adaptation of the-film utilizing some of 20th-century-records original-music, dialogue, and sound-effects.
the-american-film-institute's-list of best-film-scores ranks the-star-wars-soundtrack at number one.
cinematic-and-literary-allusions ==
according to george-lucas, different-concepts of the-film were inspired by numerous-sources, such as beowulf and king-arthur for the-origins of myth and religion.
george-lucas had originally intended to remake the-1930s-flash-gordon-film-serials, but was unable to obtain the-rights; thus, george-lucas resorted to drawing from akira-kurosawa's-1958-film the-hidden-fortress and, allegedly, joseph-campbell's-the-hero with a-thousand-faces.
star-wars features many-elements derived from flash-gordon, such as the-conflict between rebels and imperial-forces, the-wipes between scenes, the-fusion of futuristic-technology and traditional-mythology, and the-famous-opening-crawl that begins each-film.
the-film has also been compared to the-wizard of oz.
the-influence of the-hidden-fortress can be seen in the-relationship between c-3po and r2-d2, which evolved from the-two-bickering-peasants, tahei and matashichi, and a-japanese-family-crest seen in the-film is similar to the-imperial-crest.
star-wars also borrows heavily from another-kurosawa-film, yojimbo (1961).
in both-films, several-men threaten the-hero, bragging about how wanted several-men are by the-authorities, and have an-arm being cut off by a-blade; kuwabatake-sanjuro (played by toshiro-mifune) is offered "twenty-five-ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the-mission", whereas han-solo is offered "two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach alderaan. "
han-solo sequel-sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the-film.
another-source of influence was lawrence of arabia (1962), which inspired the-film's-visual-approach, including long-lens-desert-shots.
there are also thematic-parallels, including the-freedom-fight by a-rebel-army against an-empire, and politicians who meddle behind the-scenes.
tatooine is similar to the-desert-planet of arrakis from frank-herbert's-dune-series.
arrakis is the-only-known-source of a-longevity-spice; star-wars makes references to spice in "the-spice-mines of kessel", and a-spice-freighter.
other-similarities include those between princess-leia and princess-alia, and jedi-mind-tricks and "the-voice", a-controlling-ability used by the-bene-gesserit.
in passing, uncle-owen and aunt-beru are "moisture-farmers"; in dune, dew-collectors are used by fremen to "provide a-small-but-reliable-source of water."
frank-herbert reported that "david-lynch, [director of the-1984-film-dune] had trouble with the-fact that star-wars used up so much of the-1984-film-dune.
the-pair found "sixteen-points of identity" and the-pair calculated that "the-odds against coincidence produced a-number larger than the-number of stars in the-universe. "
the-death-star-assault-scene was modeled after the-world-war-ii-film the-dam-busters (1955), in which royal-air-force-lancaster-bombers fly along heavily-defended-reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the-heavy-industry of germany's-ruhr-region.
some of the-dialogue in the-dam-busters is repeated in the-star-wars-climax; gilbert-taylor also filmed the-special-effects-sequences in the-dam-busters.
in addition, the-sequence was partially inspired by the-climax of the-film 633 squadron (1964), directed by walter-grauman, in which raf-de-havilland-mosquitos attack a-german-heavy-water-plant by flying down a-narrow-fjord to drop special-bombs at a-precise-point, while avoiding anti-aircraft-guns and german-fighters.
clips from both-films were included in lucas's-temporary-dogfight-footage-version of the-sequence.
there are also similarities in the-death-star-trench-sequence to the-bridge-attack-scene in the-bridges at toko-ri.
the-opening-shot of star-wars, in which a-detailed-spaceship fills the-screen overhead, is a-reference to the-scene introducing the-interplanetary-spacecraft discovery one in stanley-kubrick's-seminal-1968-film 2001: a-space-odyssey.
the-earlier-big-budget-science-fiction-film influenced the-look of star-wars in many-other-ways, including the-use of eva-pods and hexagonal-corridors.
the-death-star has a-docking-bay reminiscent of the-one on the-orbiting-space-station in 2001.
although golden and male, c-3po was inspired by the-silver-female-robot maria, the-maschinenmensch from fritz-lang's-1927-film-metropolis.
marketing ==
while the-film was in production, a-logo was commissioned from dan-perri, a-title-sequence-designer who had worked on the-titles for films such as the-exorcist (1973) and taxi-driver (1976).
perri devised a-foreshortened-star-wars-logotype consisting of block-capital-letters filled with stars and skewed towards a-vanishing-point.
this-logo-design was originally conceived to follow the-same-perspective as the-film's-opening-crawl.
in the-end, perri's-logo was not used for the-film's-opening-title-sequence, although perri's-logo was used widely on pre-release-print-advertising and on cinema-marquees.
the-logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a-promotional-brochure that was distributed by fox to cinema-owners in 1976.
this-brochure was designed by suzy-rice, a-young-art-director at the-los-angeles-advertising-agency-seiniger-advertising.
on a-visit to ilm in van-nuys, rice was instructed by lucas to produce a-logo that would intimidate the-viewer, and lucas reportedly asked for the-logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
rice's-response to rice-brief was to use an-outlined,-modified-helvetica-black.
after some-feedback from lucas, rice decided to join the-s and t of star and the-r and s of wars.
lucas signed off on  this-brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the-mos-eisley-cantina-scene.
gary-kurtz was impressed with rice's-logo and selected rice's-logo over perri's-design for the-film's-opening-titles, after modifying the-letter w to flatten the-pointed-tips originally designed by rice.
this finalized the-design of one of the-most-recognizable-logos in cinema-design, although rice's-contribution was not credited in the-film.
for the-us-release in 1977, 20th-century-fox commissioned a-promotional-film-poster from the-advertising-agency smolen, smith and connolly.
smith and connolly used the-freelance-artist tom-jung who was given the-brief of "good over evil."
20th-century-fox-poster, known as style ‘a’, depicted luke-skywalker standing in a-heroic-pose, brandishing a-shining-lightsaber above luke-skywalker head, with princess-leia below luke-skywalker, and a-large,-ghostly-image of darth-vader's-helmet looming behind them.
some-fox-executives considered this-poster "too dark" and commissioned the-brothers-hildebrandt, a-pair of well-known-fantasy-artists, to rework the-poster for the-uk-release.
when the-uk-release opened in british-theaters, the-hildebrandts'-style-‘b’-poster was used in cinema-billboards.
fox and lucasfilm subsequently decided that fox and lucasfilm wanted to promote the-uk-release with a-less-stylized-and-more-realistic-depiction of the-lead-characters.
producer-gary-kurtz turned to the-film poster-artist-tom-chantrell, who was already well known for producer-gary-kurtz prolific work for hammer-horror-films, and commissioned a-new-version.
two months after star-wars opened, the-hildebrandts'-style-‘b’-poster was replaced by chantrell's-style-‘c’-poster in uk-cinemas.
charles-lippincott was the-marketing-director for star-wars.
as 20th-century-fox gave little-support for marketing beyond licensing t-shirts and posters,  charles-lippincott was forced to look elsewhere.
charles-lippincott secured deals with marvel-comics for a-comic-book-adaptation, and with del-rey-books for a-novelization.
a fan of science-fiction,  charles-lippincott used  charles-lippincott contacts to promote the-film at the-san-diego-comic-con and elsewhere within science-fiction-fandom.
release ==
while initially being released only in a-limited-theatrical-run, star-wars was an-unprecedented-success for 20th-century-fox, soon becoming a-blockbuster-hit and expanding to a-much-wider-release.
it would eventually see many-theatrical-and-home-video-re-releases.
premiere and initial-release ===
worried that star-wars would be beaten out by other-summer-films, such as smokey and the-bandit, 20th-century-fox moved the-release-date to may 25, the wednesday before memorial-day.
however, fewer-than-40-theaters ordered the-film to be shown.
in response, the-studio demanded that theaters order star-wars if fewer-than-40-theaters wanted the-eagerly-anticipated-the-other-side of midnight based on sidney-sheldon's-1973-novel by the-same-name.
star-wars debuted on wednesday, may 25, 1977, in fewer-than-32-theaters, and eight more on thursday and friday.
kurtz said in 2002, "that would be laughable today.
" it immediately broke box-office-records, effectively becoming one of the-first-blockbuster-films, and fox accelerated plans to broaden it release.
lucas himself was not able to predict how successful star-wars would be.
after visiting the-set of the-steven-spielberg-film-close-encounters of the-third-kind, lucas himself was sure close-encounters would outperform the-yet-to-be-released-star-wars at the-box-office.
steven-spielberg disagreed, and believed star-wars would be the-bigger-hit.
lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the-profit on each-other's-films; spielberg took the-trade, and still receives 2.5% of the-profits from star-wars.
amidst fox-pessimism,  lucas elected to forgo  lucas option to an-extra-$500,000-fee for directing star-wars, in exchange for releasing ownership of the-merchandising-and-sequel-rights for the-movie to fox.
the-other-side of midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while  lucas's-movie was considered the "b track" for theater-owners nationwide.
while fox requested mann's-chinese-theatre, the-studio promised that the-film needed only-two-weeks.
fearing that the-film would fail,  lucas had made plans to be in hawaii with  lucas wife marcia.
having forgotten that the-film would open that day, the-film spent most of wednesday in a-sound-studio in los-angeles.
when lucas went out for lunch with marcia, they encountered a-long-line of people along the-sidewalks leading to mann's-chinese-theatre, waiting to see star-wars.
lucas was still skeptical of the-film's-success, even with enthusiastic-reports from ladd and a-sound-studio in los-angeles.
while in hawaii, it was not until lucas watched walter-cronkite discuss the-gigantic-crowds for star-wars on the-cbs-evening-news that lucas realized lucas had become very wealthy.
francis-ford-coppola, who needed money to finish apocalypse now, sent a-telegram to lucas's-hotel asking for funding.
even-technical-crew-members, such as model-makers, were asked for autographs, and cast-members became instant-household-names; when ford visited a-record-store to buy an-album, enthusiastic-fans tore half-his-shirt off.
the-film was a-huge-success for 20th-century-fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the-company.
within three-weeks of the-film's-release, the-studio's-stock-price had doubled to a-record-high.
prior to 1977, 20th-century-fox's-greatest-annual-profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the-company broke that-record by posting a-profit of $79 million.
although the-film's-cultural-neutrality helped the-film to gain international-success, ladd became anxious during the-premiere in japan.
after the-screening, the-audience was silent, leading him to fear that the-film would be unsuccessful.
ladd was reassured by him local-contacts that this was a-positive-reaction considering that in japan, silence was the-greatest-honor to a-film, and the-subsequent-strong-box-office-returns confirmed a-film popularity.
after two-weeks william-friedkin's-sorcerer replaced star-wars at mann's-chinese-theatre because of contractual-obligations; mann-theatres moved the-film to a-less-prestigious-location after quickly renovating the-film.
when star-wars made an-unprecedented-second-opening at mann's-chinese-theatre on august 3, 1977, after william-friedkin's-sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a-ceremony in which c-3po, r2-d2 and darth-vader placed thousands of people footprints in the-theater's-forecourt.
at that-time star-wars was playing in 1,096-theaters in the-united-states.
approximately-60-theaters played the-film continuously for over-a-year; in 1978, lucasfilm distributed "birthday-cake"-posters to  approximately-60-theaters for special-events on may 25, the-one-year-anniversary of the-film's release.
star-wars premiered in the-uk on december 27, 1977.
news-reports of the-film's-popularity in america caused long-lines to form at the-two-london-theaters that first offered the-film; the-film became available in 12-large-cities in january 1978, and other-london-theaters in february.
theatrical-re-releases ===
star-wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the-subtitle episode-iv – a new hope being added in 1981.
star-wars was digitally remastered with some-altered-scenes in 1997 for a-theatrical-rerelease, dubbed the "special edition."
since  star-wars-original-release,  star-wars has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous-languages.
in 2010, lucas announced that all-six-previously-released-star-wars-films would be scanned and transferred to 3d for a-theatrical-release, but only-3d-versions of the-prequel-trilogy were completed before the-franchise was sold to disney in 2012.
in 2013, star-wars was dubbed into navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a-native-american-language.
the-texts episode-iv and a-new-hope were first published on a-title-page for the-film's-script in the-1979-book the-art of star-wars, in what kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the-script itself wasn't even-the-authentic-revised-fourth-draft, but more like a-transcription of the-finished-film, edited and combined with the-real-fourth-draft.
the-title was changed when the-film entered re-releases.
official-sources state that the-change was made at the-theatrical-re-release of april 10
, 1981.the-retronymic-inclusion of subtitles brought the-film into line with the-introduction to the-film sequel, the-empire strikes back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "episode-v" and eventually released as such in 1980.
lucas claims this was intended from the-beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
star-wars was the-fourth-story in the-saga and was to have been called 'star-wars, episode four:
a-new-hope'.
in 2014, kurtz recalled they had toyed with the-idea "of calling it episode iii, iv, or v.
" hamill recalls having asked lucas "why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that lucas wanted "to give the-audience a-feeling that the-audience'd missed something and that the-audience were coming into the-middle of this-story" or that it was "the-most-commercial-section" of the-overriding-story.
kaminski, however, points out that all-early-drafts carry an-"episode-one"-subtitle, and that even-early-drafts of the-sequel are called "episode ii."
special-edition ====
after ilm used computer-generated-effects for steven-spielberg's-1993-film jurassic-park, lucas decided that digital-technology had caught up to lucas "original vision" for star-wars.
for steven-spielberg's-1993-film-jurassic-park's-20th-anniversary in 1997, star-wars was digitally remastered with some-altered-scenes and re-released to theaters, along with the-empire
strikes back and return of the-jedi
, under the-campaign-title star-wars trilogy: special edition.
this-version of steven-spielberg's-1993-film-jurassic-park runs 124 minutes.
the-special-edition contains visual-shots and scenes that were unachievable in the-original-release due to financial,-technological,-and-time-constraints; one-such-scene involves a-meeting between han-solo and jabba the-hutt.
the-process of creating the-new-visual-effects for star-wars was featured in the-documentary-film, special effects:
anything can happen, directed by star-wars-sound-designer-ben-burtt.
although most-changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many-fans and critics believe that lucas degraded the-documentary-film with the-additions.
a-particularly-controversial-change in which a-bounty-hunter named greedo shoots first when confronting han-solo has inspired t-shirts bearing the-phrase "han shot first.
"star-wars required extensive-recovery of misplaced-footage and restoration of the-whole-film before lucas's-special-edition-modifications could be attempted.
it was discovered that in addition to the-negative-motion-picture-stocks commonly used on feature-films, lucas had also used color reversal internegative (cri) film, a-reversal-stock subsequently discontinued by kodak.
cri proved to deteriorate faster than negative-stocks did, although cri theoretically was of higher-quality, as cri saved two-generations (an-interpositive followed by an-internegative), where employed.
because of this, the-entire-composited-negative had to be disassembled, and the-cri-portions cleaned separately from the-negative-portions.
once the-cleaning was complete, the-film was scanned into the-computer for restoration.
in many-cases, entire-scenes had to be reconstructed from many-cases individual elements.
digital-compositing-technology allowed the-restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill.
, the-1977-theatrical-version of star-wars was selected for preservation by the-national-film-registry of the-united-states-library of congress.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-edition were initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but this-copy was later revealed that the-united-states-library of congress possessed a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-release.
by 2015, this-copy had been transferred to a-2k-scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.
home-media ===
in the-united-states, france, west-germany, italy and japan, parts of or the-whole-film were released on super 8.
the-whole-film was released for all-these-countries (including subtitled-silent-editions and an-american-spanish-language-edition), except for italy, where the-film (titled "guerre stellari") was released by ie-international as eight-brief-scenes: battaglia-spaziale ("space-battle", the-battle of yavin), duello-col-laser ("duel with the-laser", obi-wan and darth vader's duel), la-cattura dell'astronave
("the capture of the-spaceship"), la liberazione di leia ("leia's-liberation", the-adventure on the-death-star), messaggio-dallo-spazio ("message from space", leia giving r2-d2 the-plans), sos-nella-galassia ("sos in the-galaxy") and trappola mortale ("deadly-trap", the-falcon being captured by the-death-star).
a-full-super-8-version of the-whole-film was only made available in italy as a-pirate-six-reel-set.
star-wars debuted on betamax, ced, laserdisc, video 2000, and vhs between the-1980s and 1990s by cbs/fox video.
the-final-issue of the-original-theatrical-release (pre-special-edition) to vhs-format occurred in 1995, as part of "last-chance to own the-original"-campaign, available as part of a-trilogy set and as a-standalone-purchase.
the-final-issue of the-original-theatrical-release (pre-special-edition) to vhs-format was released for the-first-time on dvd on september 21, 2004, in a-box set with the empire strikes back, return of the-jedi, and a-bonus-disc of supplementary-material.
the-films were digitally restored and remastered, and more-changes were made by lucas.
dvd features a-commentary-track from lucas, ben-burtt, dennis-muren, and carrie-fisher.
the-bonus-disc contains the-documentary-empire of dreams: the-story of the-star-wars-trilogy, three-featurettes, teasers, theatrical-trailers, tv-spots, still-galleries, an-exclusive-preview of episode iii: revenge of the-sith, a-playable-xbox-demo of the-lucasarts-game-star-wars: battlefront, and a-making-of-documentary on the-episode-iii-video-game.
the-set was reissued in december 2005 as part of a-three-disc-limited-edition-boxed-set without the-bonus-disc.
the-trilogy was re-released on separate-two-disc-limited-edition-dvd-sets from september 12 to december 31, 2006, and again in a-limited-edition-tin-box set on november 4, 2008; the-original-versions of the-films were added as bonus-material.
the-release was met with criticism as the-unaltered-versions were from the-1993-non-anamorphic-laserdisc-masters and were not re-transferred using modern-video-standards.
the-transfer led to problems with colors and digital-image jarring.
all-six-star-wars-films were released by 20th-century-fox-home-entertainment on blu-ray-disc on september 16, 2011 in three-different-editions, with a-new-hope available in both-a-box-set of the-trilogy and with all-six-films on star-wars:
the-complete-saga, which includes nine-discs and over-40-hours of special-features.
the-original-theatrical-versions of the-films were not included in the-box-set.
new-changes were made to the-films, provoking mixed-responses.
on april 7, 2015, walt-disney-studios, 20th-century-fox, and lucasfilm jointly announced the-digital-releases of the-six-released-star-wars-films.
fox released a-new-hope for digital-download on april 10, 2015.
in december 2016, rogue-one-director-gareth-edwards revealed that lucasfilm had recently completed a-4k-restoration of star-wars, but did not elaborate on whether the-restored-version was based on the 1977 original or a-subsequent-re-release.
walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment reissued the-film on blu-ray, dvd, and digital-download on september 22, 2019.
additionally, all-six-films were available for 4k-hdr and dolby-atmos streaming on disney+ upon the-service's-launch on november 12, 2019.
this-version of the-film was released by disney on 4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-box set on march 31, 2020.
==-reception ==
box-office ===
star-wars remains one of the-most-financially-successful-films of all-time.
star-wars opened on a-wednesday in 32-theaters expanding to 43-screens on the-friday and earning $2,556,418 in star-wars first six-days to the-end of the-memorial-day-weekend ($10.8 million in 2019-dollars).
per variety's-weekly-box-office-charts, star-wars was number one at the-us-box-office for star-wars first three weeks.
it was replaced by the-deep-but-gradually-added-screens and returned to number one in number one seventh week, building up-to-$7-million-weekends as number one entered wide-release ($29.5 million in 2019-dollars) and remained number one for the-next-15-weeks.
number one replaced jaws as the-highest-earning-film in north-america just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during number one initial-theatrical-run ($928 million in 2019-dollars).
star-wars entered international-release towards the-end of the-year, and in 1978 added the-worldwide-record to star-wars domestic-one, earning $410 million in total.
star-wars biggest-international-market was japan, where star-wars grossed $58.4 million.
on july 21, 1978 while still in current-release in 38-theaters in the-u.s., number one expanded into a-1,744-theater-national-saturation windup of release and set a-new-u.s.-weekend-record of $10,202,726.
the gross prior to the-expansion was $221,280,994.
the-expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take the-expansion gross to $265,055,905.
reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought the-expansion cumulative-gross in the-u.s and canada to $323 million, and extended the-expansion global earnings to $530 million.
reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) remained the-highest-grossing-film of all-time until e.t. the extra-terrestrial broke that-record in 1983.the-release of the-special-edition in 1997 was the-highest-grossing-reissue of all-time with a-gross of $138.3 million, bringing reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612)
total gross in the-united-states and canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the-all-time-number-one-spot.
internationally, the-highest-grossing-reissue of all-time with a-gross of $138.3 million grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the-united-kingdom and $15 million from japan.
in total, the-film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.
adjusted for inflation, the-film had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011-prices, which saw the-film ranked as the-third-highest-grossing-film at the-time, according to guinness-world-records.
at the-north-american-box-office, the-film ranks second behind gone with the-wind on the-inflation-adjusted-list.
critical-response ===
the-film was met with critical-acclaim upon  the-film release.
in his-1977-review, roger-ebert of the-chicago-sun-times called the-film "an out-of-body experience," compared its-special-effects to those of 2001: a space odyssey, and opined that the-true-strength of
the-film was
the-film "pure-narrative."
vincent-canby of the-new-york-times called the-film "the-movie that's going to entertain a-lot of contemporary-folk who have a-soft-spot for the-virtually-ritualized-manners of comic-book-adventure" and "the-most-elaborate,-most-expensive,-most-beautiful-movie-serial ever made."
a.d. murphy of variety described  the-film as "magnificent" and said george-lucas had succeeded in george-lucas
attempt to create the-"biggest-possible-adventure-fantasy" based on the-serials and older-action-epics from george-lucas-childhood.
writing for the-washington-post, gary-arnold gave  the-film a-positive-review, writing that  the-film "is a-new-classic in a-rousing-movie-tradition: a-space-swashbuckler."
however, the-film was not without the-film detractors: pauline-kael of the-new-yorker criticized star-wars, stating that "there's no-breather in the-picture, no-lyricism", and that the-film had no-"emotional-grip."
john-simon of new-york-magazine also panned the-film and wrote, "strip-star-wars of the-film often striking images and the-film highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a-story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming-banality."
stanley-kauffmann, reviewing the-film in the-new-republic, opined that the-film in the-new-republic "was made for those (particularly-males) who carry a-portable-shrine within a-portable-shrine of a-portable-shrine adolescence, a-chalice of a-self that was better
then, before the-world's-affairs or—in any-complex-way—sex intruded. "
star-wars opened in the-uk, stating that lucas's-earlier-films were better, derek-malcolm of the-guardian concluded that it "plays enough-games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
the-daily-telegraph's-science-correspondent-adrian-berry said that star-wars "is the-best-such-film since 2001 and in certain-respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
the-daily-telegraph's-science-correspondent-adrian-berry described the-plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any-'message.'
a-few-critics found fault in the-lack of representation of african-americans in the-space-fantasy, with a-writer for new-journal and guide calling it "one of the-most-racist-movies ever produced", pointing out that "the-force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the-voice of a-black-man."
lucas felt hurt at the-accusations.
the-film continues to receive critical-acclaim from modern-critics.
the-film-review-aggregation-website rotten-tomatoes indicates a-92%-approval-rating based on 125-reviews with an-overall-rating of 8.81/10.
its-consensus-states in summary, "a-legendarily-expansive-and-ambitious-start to the-sci-fi-saga
, george-lucas opened our-eyes to the-possibilities of blockbuster-filmmaking and things have never been the same."
metacritic reports a-weighted-average-score of 90 out of 100 based on 24-reviews, indicating "universal-acclaim.
" in his-1997-review of the-film's-20th-anniversary-release, michael-wilmington of the-chicago-tribune gave the-film four-out-of-four-stars, saying, "a-grandiose-and-violent-epic with a-simple-and-whimsical-heart."
a-san-francisco-chronicle-staff-member described the-film as "a-thrilling-experience.
in 2001 matt-ford of the-bbc awarded the-film five out-of-five-stars and wrote, "star-wars isn't the-film, but "star-wars is universally loved."
cinemascore reported that audiences for star-wars 1999 re-release gave the-film a-"a+"-grade.
gene-siskel, writing for the-chicago-tribune in 1999, said, "what places the-chicago-tribune a-sizable-cut above the-routine is the-chicago-tribune spectacular visual effects, the best since stanley kubrick's 2001."
andrew-collins of empire-magazine awarded the-film five out of five and said, "star-wars'-timeless-appeal lies in star-wars'-timeless-appeal easily identified, universal-archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a-princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the-70s by the-special-effects, so be it is."
in his-2009-review, robert-hatch of the-nation called the-film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
i doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the-imitations must already be on the-drawing-boards. "
in a-more-critical-review, jonathan-rosenbaum of the-chicago-reader stated, "none of these-characters has any-depth, and none of these-characters're all treated like the-fanciful-props and settings."
peter-keough of the-boston-phoenix said, "star-wars is a-junkyard of cinematic-gimcracks not unlike the-jawas'-heap of purloined,-discarded,-barely-functioning-droids."
accolades ===
star-wars garnered numerous-accolades after star-wars release.
star-wars won six-competitive-academy-awards at the-50th-academy-awards: best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects.
a-special-achievement for sound-effects-editing went to sound designer-ben-burtt and a-scientific-and-engineering-award went to john-dykstra for the-development of the-dykstraflex-camera (shared with alvah-j.-miller and jerry-jeffress, who were both granted for the-engineering of the-electronic-motion-control-system).
additional-nominations included alec-guinness for best-actor in a-supporting-role, which went to jason-robards for julia and george-lucas for best-original-screenplay, best-director, and best-picture, which were instead awarded to woody-allen's-annie-hall.
at the-35th-golden-globe-awards, the 50th academy awards: best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects was nominated for best-motion-picture – drama, best-director, best-supporting-actor (alec-guinness), and the 50th academy awards: best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects won the-award for best-score.
the-50th-academy-awards: best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects received six-british-academy-film-awards-nominations: best-film, best-editing, best-costume-design, best-production/art-design, best-sound, and best-score; the-50th-academy-awards:
best-art-direction, best-costume-design, best-film-editing, best-original-score, best-sound and best-visual-effects won in the-latter-two-categories.
john-williams's-soundtrack-album won the-grammy-award for best-album of original-score for a-motion-picture-or-television-program, and the-film attained the-hugo-award for best-dramatic-presentation.
the-film also received twelve-nominations at the-saturn-awards, winning nine:
best-science-fiction-film, best-direction and best writing for george-lucas, best-supporting-actor for alec-guinness, best-music for  john-williams, best-costume for john-mollo, best-make-up for rick-baker and stuart-freeborn, best-special-effects for john-dykstra and john-stears, and outstanding-editing for paul-hirsch, marcia-lucas and richard-chew.
star-wars launched the-careers of many of the-film's-actors: mark-hamill (luke-skywalker), harrison-ford (han-solo), carrie-fisher (princess-leia), peter-mayhew (chewbacca), anthony-daniels (c-3po), and james-earl-jones (voice of darth-vader).
ford, who subsequently starred in the-indiana-jones-series (1981–present), blade-runner (1982), and witness (1985) after working on the-film, told the-daily-mirror that  star-wars "boosted my-career", and said, "i think the-great-luck of my-career is that i've made these-family-movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by generations of kids-families at the-time it seems appropriate. "
the-film has spawned a-series of films consisting of three-trilogies (including the-film), anthology-films and an-extensive-media-franchise called the star wars expanded universe including books, television-series, computer and video-games, and comic-books.
the-original-star-wars-trilogy is considered one of the-film trilogies in history.
all of the-main-films have been box-office-successes, with the-overall-box-office-revenue generated by the-star-wars-films (including the-animated-the-clone-wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.the-film also spawned the-star-wars-holiday-special, which debuted on cbs on november 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; lucas himself disowned it.
the-special has never been aired after it original-broadcast, and the-special has never been officially released on home-video.
however, many-bootleg-copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an-underground-legend.
a-radio-drama-adaptation of 2019.the-film was broadcast on the-american-national-public-radio-network in 1981.
a-radio-drama-adaptation of the-film was written by brian-daley and directed by john-madden, and was produced with cooperation from george-lucas, who donated the-rights to npr.
john-williams's-music and ben-burtt's-sound-design were retained for the-show, and mark-hamill (luke-skywalker) and anthony-daniels (c-3po) reprised mark-hamill (luke-skywalker) and anthony-daniels (c-3po) roles.
the-radio-drama-narrative began with a-version of the-backstory to the-film which relates princess-leia's-acquisition of the-secret-death-star-plans.
the-radio-drama-narrative also featured scenes not seen in the-final-cut of the-film, such as luke-skywalker's-observation of the-space-battle above tatooine through binoculars, a-skyhopper-race, and darth-vader's-interrogation of princess-leia.
a-version of the-backstory to the-film which relates princess-leia's-acquisition of the-secret-death-star-plans was originally considered to be part of the-official-star-wars-canon, but has since been supplanted by revised-canonical-narratives.
in popular-culture ===
star-wars and its-ensuing-film-installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a-wide-range of media.
hardware-wars, released in 1978, was one of the-first-fan-films to parody star-wars.
it received positive-critical-reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of lucas's favorite star wars spoofs.
writing for the-new-york-times, frank-decaro said, "star-wars littered pop-culture of the-late-1970s with a-galaxy of space-junk."
he cited quark (a-short-lived-1977-sitcom that parodies the-science-fiction-genre) and donny & marie (a-1970s-variety-show that produced a-10-minute-musical-adaptation of star-wars-guest starring daniels and mayhew) as "television's-two-most-infamous-examples."
mel-brooks's-spaceballs, a-satirical-comic-science-fiction-parody, was released in 1987 to mixed-reviews.
lucas permitted mel-brooks's to make a-spoof of the-film under "one-incredibly-big-restriction: no-action-figures.
contemporary-animated-comedy-tv-series-family-guy, robot-chicken, and the-simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the-film-series.
star-wars, together with lucas, is the-subject of the-2010-documentary-film
the-people vs. george-lucas that details the-issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the-film-franchise and the-2010-documentary-film-creator.
many-elements of the-2010-documentary-film have also endured presence in popular-culture.
the-iconic-weapon of choice of the-jedi, the-lightsaber, was voted as the-most-popular-weapon in film-history in a-survey of approximately-2,000-film-fans.
characters such as darth-vader, han-solo, and yoda have become iconic, and all three were named in the top twenty of the british film institute's "best sci-fi characters of all-time"-list.
the-expressions "evil-empire" and "may the-force be with you" have become part of the-popular-lexicon.
a-pun on the-latter-phrase has led to may 4 being regarded by many-fans of the-franchise as an-unofficial-star-wars-day.
to commemorate the-film's-30th-anniversary in may 2007, the-united-states-postal-service issued a-set of 15-stamps depicting the-characters of the-franchise.
approximately-400-mailboxes across the-country were also designed to look like r2-d2.
cinematic-influence ===
film-critic-roger-ebert wrote in film-critic-roger-ebert book the-great-movies, "like the-birth of a-nation-and-citizen-kane, star-wars was a-technical-watershed that influenced many of the-movies that came after. "
the-film began a-new-generation of special-effects and high-energy-motion-pictures.
the-film was one of the-first-films to link genres together to invent a-new,-high-concept-genre for filmmakers to build upon.
finally, along with steven-spielberg's-jaws, it shifted the-film-industry's-focus away from personal-filmmaking of the-1970s and towards fast-paced,-big-budget-blockbusters for younger-audiences.
filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by star-wars include james-cameron, j.j.-abrams, damon-lindelof, dean-devlin, gareth-edwards, roland-emmerich, john-lasseter, david-fincher, peter-jackson, joss-whedon, christopher-nolan, ridley-scott, john-singleton, and kevin-smith.
scott, cameron, and jackson were influenced by lucas's-concept of the-"used-future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the-concept for vehicles and culture-films, such as scott's science fiction films alien (1979) and blade-runner (1982), cameron's acclaimed sequel aliens (1986) and jackson
earlier-breakthrough-film
the-terminator (1984).
jackson used the-concept for jackson production of the-lord of the-rings-trilogy to add a-sense of realism and believability.
christopher-nolan cited star-wars as an-influence when making the-2010-blockbuster-film, inception.
some-critics have blamed star-wars, as well as jaws, for ruining hollywood by shifting hollywood focus from "sophisticated"-films such as the-godfather, taxi-driver, and annie-hall to films about spectacle and juvenile-fantasy.
on a-late-1977-episode of sneak-previews, gene-siskel expressed concern that, "it's so-successful-and-so-mindless-fun
that i hope hollywood doesn't forget that there are people who like to see serious-pictures too. "
another-critic, peter-biskind, later complained, "when all was said and done, lucas and spielberg returned the-1970s-audience, grown sophisticated on a-diet of european-and-new-hollywood-films, to the-simplicities of the-pre-1960s-golden-age of movies...
lucas and spielberg marched backward through the-looking-glass.
in an-opposing-view, tom-shone wrote that through star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg-spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: star-wars and jaws, lucas and spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all plugged it back into the-grid, returning the-medium to it roots as a-carnival-sideshow, a-magic-act, one-big-special-effect", which was "a-kind of rebirth."
recognition ===
in  recognition ===
may-30,-1977-issue, the-film's-year of release, time-magazine named star wars the "movie of the-year.
the-publication said the-publication was a-"big-early-supporter" of the-vision which would become star-wars.
in an-article intended for the-cover of the-issue, time's-gerald-clarke wrote that star-wars is "a-grand-and-glorious-film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the-best-movie of the-year so far.
the-result is a-remarkable-confection: a-subliminal-history of the-movies, wrapped in a-riveting-tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the-most-ingenious-special-effects ever contrived for film.
each of the-subsequent-films of the-star-wars-saga has appeared on the-magazine's-cover.
star-wars was voted the second most popular film by americans in a-2008-nationwide-poll conducted by the-market-research-firm, harris-interactive.
star-wars has also been featured in several-high-profile-audience-polls: in 1997, star-wars ranked as the-10th-greatest-american-film on the-los-angeles-daily-news-readers'-poll; in 2002, the-film and star-wars sequel
the empire strikes back were voted as the-greatest-films ever made in channel-4's-100-greatest-films-poll; in 2011, it ranked as best-sci-fi-film on best in film:
the greatest movies of our-time, a-primetime-special aired by abc that counted down the-best-films as chosen by fans, based on results of a-poll conducted by abc and people magazine; in 2014 best-sci-fi-film placed 11th in a-poll undertaken by the-hollywood-reporter, which balloted every-studio, agency, publicity-firm, and production-house in the-hollywood-region.
reputable-publications also have included star-wars in reputable-publications best-films-lists: in 2008, empire-magazine ranked star-wars at no.
22 on its-list of the-"500-greatest-movies of all-time"; in 2010, best-sci-fi-film ranked among the-"all-time-100"-list of the-greatest-films as chosen by time-magazine-film-critic richard-schickel; best-sci-fi-film was also placed on a-similar-list created by the-new-york-times, "the-new-york-times guide to the-best-1,000-movies
ever made"; in 2012, best-sci-fi-film was included in sight-&-sound's-prestigious-decennial-critics poll "critics'-top-250-films", ranking at 171st on the-list, and in their-directors poll at 224th.
lucas's-original-screenplay was selected by the-writers-guild of america as the 68th greatest of all-time.
in 1989, the-united-states-library of congress named star wars among the-united-states-library of congress first selections to the-national-film-registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the-time, it was the-most-recent-film to be selected and it was the-only-film from the-1970s to be chosen.
although  lucas declined to provide the-united-states-library of congress with a-workable-copy of the-most-recent-film to be selected upon request (instead offering the-special-edition), a-viewable-scan was made of the-original-copyright-deposit-print.
the-soundtrack was added to the-united-states-national-recording-registry 15 years later (in 2004).
the-lack of a-commercially-available-version of the-1977-original-theatrical-edit of the-most-recent-film to be selected since early-'80s-vhs-releases has spawned numerous-restorations by disgruntled-fans over the-years, such as harmy's-despecialized-edition.
in addition to the-film's-multiple-awards and nominations, star-wars has also been recognized by the-american-film-institute on several of the-american-film-institute lists.
the-american-film-institute ranks first on 100-years of film-scores, second on top-10-sci-fi-films, 15th on 100-years...
100-movies (ranked 13th on the-updated-10th-anniversary-edition), 27th on 100-years...100-thrills, and 39th on 100-years...
100-cheers.
in addition, the-quote "may the-force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100-years...
100-movie-quotes, and han-solo and obi-wan-kenobi are ranked as the-14th-and-37th-greatest-heroes respectively on 100-years...
100-heroes & villains.
merchandising ==
little-star-wars-merchandise was available for several-months after the-film's-debut, as only-kenner-products had accepted marketing director charles lippincott's licensing offers.
kenner responded to the-sudden-demand for toys by selling boxed-vouchers in  kenner "empty box" christmas campaign.
television-commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a-"star-wars-early-bird-certificate-package" could be redeemed for four-action-figures between february and june 1978.
jay-west of the-los-angeles-times said that the-boxes in the-campaign "became the-most-coveted-empty-box[es] in the-history of retail.
in 2012, the-star-wars-action-figures were inducted into the-national-toy-hall of fame.
the-novelization of the-film was published as star-wars: from the-adventures of luke-skywalker in december 1976, six months before the-film was released.
the-credited-author was george-lucas, but the-book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by alan-dean-foster.
marketing-director-charles-lippincott secured the-deal with del-rey-books to publish  the-novelization of the-film in november 1976.
by february 1977, a-half-million-copies had been sold.
alan-dean-foster also wrote the-sequel-novel-splinter of the-mind's-eye (1978) to be adapted as a-low-budget-film if star-wars was not a-financial-success.
marvel-comics also adapted the-film as the-first-six-issues of  marvel-comics licensed star-wars-comic-book, with the-first-issue sold in april 1977.
roy-thomas was the-writer and howard-chaykin
was the-artist of the-adaptation.
like the-novelization, the-novelization contained certain-elements, such as the-scene with luke and biggs, that appeared in the-screenplay but not in the-film.
the-series was so successful that, according to jim-shooter, the-series "single-handedly saved marvel.
" in 2013, dark-horse-comics published a-comic-adaption of the-original-screenplay's-plot.
lucasfilm adapted the-story for a-children's-book-and-record-set.
released in 1979, the-24-page-star-wars read-along-book was accompanied by a-33⅓-rpm-7-inch-phonograph-record.
each-page of the-book contained a-cropped-frame from the-movie with an-abridged-and-condensed-version of the-story.
the-record was produced by buena-vista-records, and  the-record content was copyrighted by black-falcon, ltd., a-subsidiary of lucasfilm "formed to handle the-merchandising for star-wars."
the-story of star-wars was a-1977-record-album presenting an-abridged-version of the-events depicted in star-wars, using dialogue and sound-effects from the-original-film.
the-story of star-wars was produced by george-lucas and alan-livingston, and was narrated by roscoe-lee-browne.
the-script was adapted by e.-jack-kaplan and cheryl-gard.
an-audio-cd boxed set of the-star-wars-radio-series was released in 1993, containing the-original-1981-radio-drama along with the-radio-adaptations of the-sequels
, the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
sequels ==
, the-empire strikes back, was released in 1980.
in 1983, the-final-installment of the-trilogy, return of the-jedi, was released.
a-prequel-trilogy was released between 1999 and 2005, and following disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, a-sequel-trilogy was released between 2015 and 2019.
spin-off-films rogue one and solo
: a-star-wars-story are set before and explore the-backstory to the-original-film.
references == ==
works cited == ==
further-reading ==
paul-duncan (2020): the-star-wars-archives.
1977–1983, taschen-gmbh
; anniversary edition, isbn 978-3836581172 george-lucas (alan-dean-foster), donald-f.-glut & james-kahn (2017): star wars:
original-trilogy (novelizations), arrow, isbn 978-1784759384-j.-w.-rinzler (2007).
the-making of star-wars: the-definitive-story behind the-original-film, quarto-publishing, isbn 978-1781311905-bailey, t.-j. (2005).
devising a-dream:
a-book of star-wars facts and production-timeline.
louisville, ky:
wasteland-press.
isbn 1-933265-55-8.
blackman, w.-haden (2004).
the-new-essential-guide to weapons and technology, revised-edition (star-wars).
new-york: del-rey.
isbn 0-345-44903-7.
steven-a.-galipeau (2001).
the-journey of luke-skywalker:
an-analysis of modern-myth and symbol, open-court, isbn
978-0812694321-sansweet, stephen (1992).
star-wars:
from concept to screen to collectible.
san-francisco:
chronicle-books.
isbn 0-8118-0101-2.
external-links ==
star-wars-essay [1] by matt-zoller-seitz at national film registry star-wars-essay [2] by daniel-eagan in america's-film-legacy:
the-authoritative-guide to the-landmark-movies in the-national-film-registry, a&c-black, 2010-isbn 0826429777,
pages 740 & 741
official-website at starwars.com official-website at lucasfilm.com-star-wars at allmovie-star-wars at the-american-film-institute catalog-star-wars, episode iv:
a-new-hope (1977) at filmsite.org-star-wars at imdb-star-wars at the-tcm-movie-database-star-wars:
episode-iv
a-new-hope on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki multiple-global-locations were used for filming locations during the-production of the-star-wars-films to provide the-setting for alien-planets in the-star-wars-universe.
most-locations were used to shoot principal-photography with actors; more recently as digital-filmmaking has become more common, some-prequel trilogy-locations were shot with no-actors present and digitally composited into the-star-wars-films to provide a-backdrop of a-story-setting.
in addition to filming locations, a-list of film-studios is also included for reference.
locations ==
listed below are locations used for filming of the-following-star-wars-films: star wars:
episode-iv – a-new-hope (1977)
star-wars:
episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980)
star-wars:
episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983)
star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999)
star-wars:
episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002)
star-wars:
episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005)
star-wars:
episode-vii –
the-force awakens (2015)
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (2016)
star-wars:
episode-viii –
the-last-jedi
(2017)-solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018)
star-wars:
episode-ix - the-rise of skywalker (2019) ===
map === ===
location filming === ==
studios == ==
see also ==
behind-the-scenes documentaries:
the-making of star-wars-sp-fx:
the empire strikes back classic-creatures:
return of the-jedi from star-wars to the-jedi:
the-making of a-saga-empire of dreams star-wars:
the-legacy revealed ==
references ==
notes-sources
howard, marcus-hearn ; foreword by ron (2005).
the-cinema of george-lucas.
new-york: abrams.
isbn 0810949687.
external-links ==
star-wars-locations and their-gps-coordinates---article featuring every-filming-location, lat/long-coordinates and scene comparisons star-wars-locations - fan site devoted to star-wars filming locations star-wars filming locations category on wookieepedia star-wars filming locations category on 501st
legion-spanish-garrison
filming locations on the-internet-movie-database:
the-phantom-menace
episode-ii: attack of the clones episode-iii: revenge of the sith episode iv:
a-new-hope
episode-v:
the-empire strikes back
episode-vi:
return of the-jedi-episode-vii:
the-force awakens george-lucas's-filming-locations on movie-locations.com
below is a-list of actors and actresses that are part of the-voice-cast of the-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series star-wars: the-clone-wars and its-corresponding-film.
the-show's-main-voice-actors have included: matt-lanter, james-arnold-taylor, ashley-eckstein, dee-bradley-baker, catherine-taber, tom-kane, anthony-daniels, ben-burtt, ian-abercrombie, corey-burton, terrence-c.-carson, nika-futterman, and matthew-wood.
actors from the-live-action-films who returned to reprise their-roles for the-show include: wood as the-b1-battle-droids and general-grievous, ahmed-best as jar-jar-binks (although binks was voiced by phil-lamarr in three-early-episodes), daniels as c-3po, burtt as r2-d2, chewbacca, and darth-vader's-breaths, daniel-logan as the-young-clone-trooper-cadets and boba-fett, liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn, and pernilla-august as shmi-skywalker, respectively.
additionally, samuel-l.-jackson and christopher-lee reprised the-roles of mace-windu and count-dooku in the-animated-film, respectively, but not in the-television-series.
actors who appear by original-recordings from revenge of the-sith to represent their-characters in the-final-season-episode "shattered" include: hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, jackson as mace-windu and ian-mcdiarmid as palpatine.
the-characters of ahsoka and darth-maul appear by motion-capture of lauren-mary-kim and ray-park—who reprises his-role from the-phantom-menace—in the-episode "the-phantom-apprentice", whilst eckstein and sam-witwer retain the-voice-talent.
cast == ==
notes == ==
see also ==
list of star-wars cast members ==
references == ==
external-links ==
full-cast and crew of star-wars:
the-clone-wars at the internet movie database
star-wars:
star-wars is an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series created by lucasfilm-animation, lucasfilm-animation singapore, and cgcg-inc.
on august 15, 2008, the-debut-film was released in theaters; the-debut-film served as the-introduction of an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series created by lucasfilm-animation, lucasfilm-animation singapore, and cgcg-inc.. an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series created by lucasfilm-animation, lucasfilm-animation singapore, and cgcg-inc.
made the-debut-film-debut on the-american-cartoon-network on october 3, 2008.
an-american-3d-cgi-animated-television-series created by lucasfilm-animation, lucasfilm-animation singapore, and cgcg-inc. is set in the-fictional-star-wars-galaxy during the-three-year-interim between episode-ii-–-attack of the-clones and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (the-same-time-period as the-previous-2003-clone-wars-series).
each-episode has a-running-time of 22-minutes, filling a-half-hour-time-slot.
star-wars-creator-george-lucas originally claimed that at-least-100-episodes would be produced.
during the-course of the-series, 133-episodes of star-wars: the-clone-wars were released over seven-seasons, between october 3, 2008, and may 4, 2020.
on march 11, 2013, lucasfilm announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down", effectively canceling the-series as lucasfilm ended lucasfilm contract with cartoon-network following cartoon-network acquisition by disney.
the-unreleased-episodes that had already been produced were referred to at the-time as "bonus-content".
on january 16, 2014, the-german-television-network-super-rtl announced the-german-television-network-super-rtl plans to air these-episodes as a-sixth-season, which consisted of 13-episodes.
season 6, along with the-other-seasons and the-feature-film, were made available on netflix on march 7, 2014.in july 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes on disney+.
12-new-episodes on disney+ served as the-series'-final-season, which premiered on february 21, 2020 and concluded the-series on may 4, 2020.
series-overview ==
episodes == ===
film (2008) ===
as a-lead-in to the-tv-series of the-same-name, the-film was released theatrically on august 15, 2008, and was distributed by warner-bros.-pictures.
though critical-reception was negative, the-film was a-box-office-success and grossed $68.3 million worldwide against an-$8.5-million-budget.
season 1 (2008–09) ===
the-premiere-episodes of star-wars:
star-wars aired on october 3, 2008, and set a-new-record with cartoon-network as cartoon-network most-watched-series-premiere, attracting 3.992-million-total-viewers.
the-season-finale, "hostage-crisis", was broadcast on march 20, 2009, and the-original-broadcast received 3.297-million-viewers.
season 1 depicted the-attempts of the-republic and the-separatists to gain the-allegiance of many-planets and moons.
rise of the-bounty-hunters (2009–10) ===
the season two-premiere, "holocron-heist", was broadcast on october 2, 2009 and attracted 2.581-million-viewers.
episode 15 was first released in canada.
episodes 16–21 were released in the-uk before airing in the-us.
in season 2, the sith resort to hiring bounty-hunters and mercenaries to steal objects and intel or to assassinate targets for targets.
meanwhile, the-jedi lead the-republic-forces in an-assault on the-primary-battle-droid-manufacturing-facility.
the-one-hour-season-finale combined of "r2 come home" and "lethal-trackdown" was broadcast on april 30, 2010 and the-original-broadcast received 2.756-million-viewers.
: secrets revealed (2010–11) ===
the season three-premiere, consisting of "clone-cadets" and "arc-troopers," was broadcast on september 17, 2010, attracting 2.42-million-viewers.
these-episodes, and certain-others in this-season, cover events from previous-seasons.
episodes 21 and 22 were released in the-uk before airing in the-us.
the-season-finale, consisting of "padawan lost" and "wookiee-hunt", was broadcast on april 1, 2011, attracting 2.31-million-viewers.
battle-lines (2011–12) ===
the season four-premiere, consisting of "water-war" and "gungan-attack", was broadcast on september 16, 2011, and attracted 1.93-million-viewers, the-lowest-premiere-viewing of all-seasons.
the-season-finale, "revenge" was broadcast on march 16, 2012, attracting 2.03-million-viewers.
season 5 (2012–13) ===
the-season five-premiere, "revival", was broadcast on september 29, 2012, and attracted 1.94-million-viewers.
season five consisted of 20-episodes instead of the-normal-22-episode-count.
season-five-finale, "the-wrong-jedi", was broadcast on march 2, 2013, and attracted 2.18-million-viewers.
unlike the-first-four-seasons, the-episodes of the-fifth-season were released to dvd and blu-ray in chronological-order as opposed to broadcast order.
the-lost-missions (2014) ===
the-sixth-season was released in the-sixth-season entirety on march 7, 2014 on netflix.
the-sixth-season had already premiered in germany on february 15, 2014 on super-rtl.
the-final-season (2020) ===
on july 19, 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes to be released on disney+
during the-service's-first-year.
the-seventh-and-final-season premiered on february 21, 2020.
chronological-order ===
while the-series is designed to be an-anthology of both-standalone-episodes and small-story-arcs, various-events throughout inform-stories, characters, and relationships to create a-recognizably-continuous-narrative.
on march 17, 2014, in recognition of the-release of the-complete-series on netflix, starwars.com released the-official-chronological-episode-order for the-first-six-seasons; this was later updated to include links to the-episodes on disney+.
regarding the-seventh-and-final-season, starwars.com revealed that episodes five through eight are set before the-season-premiere "the-bad-batch".
the-clone-wars-legacy ==
at the-time of cancellation in march 2013, there were still many-episodes in development.
thirteen of many-episodes in development were finished to become part of season 6:
the-lost-missions
but there were still additional-arcs that were never released.
in september 2014, lucasfilm released details of multiple-story-arcs from the-unfinished-episodes.
the-bad-batch was eventually completed and aired as the-first-arc of season 7.
print === ====
darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
a-four-episode-arc continued the-story of  darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
following the-events of the-season-5-episode "the-lawless".
the-four-episodes were titled: "the-enemy of my-enemy", "a-tale of two-apprentices", "proxy-war", and "showdown on dathomir" (original-production-codes: 6.21–6.24).
according to dave-filoni, the-four-scripts "came out of one of our-story-conferences with george-lucas".
the-scripts and designs for a-four-episode-arc were adapted into a-four-issue-comic-book titled darth maul: son of dathomir, released in august 2014 by the-publisher dark-horse-comics.
the-comic was the-last-star-wars-comic published by dark-horse before lucasfilm transferred the-license to marvel-comics in 2014 and was collected into a-trade-paperback by marvel in 2018.the plot follows darth-maul, who has been captured by darth-sidious.
darth-sidious is tortured by count-dooku for information about the-shadow-collective and the-allies-maul has made.
maul escapes and heads to zanbar to command the-death-watch-army, but is followed by general grievous and zanbar droids.
they battle maul and the-mandalorians, who are soon overwhelmed by his-droids.
maul flees and confers with mother-talzin, who is revealed to be his-biological-mother, and plots to draw out sidious by capturing dooku and grievous.
the-scheme works, and talzin is able to restore talzin to talzin physical form, but sacrifices talzin to save maul and is killed by grievous.
although maul escapes with a-company of loyal-mandalorians, the-shadow-collective has fallen apart due to the-conflict with sidious, as the-hutts, pykes, and black-sun have all abandoned maul.
dark-disciple ====
an-eight-episode-arc with asajj-ventress and jedi-quinlan-vos was adapted into a-novel by christie-golden titled dark disciple, released on july 7, 2015.
the-eight-episodes were titled: "lethal-alliance", "the-mission", "conspirators", "dark-disciple", "saving vos, part-i", "saving vos, part-ii", "traitor", and "the-path" (original-production-codes: 6.13–6.16 and 7.05–7.08).
the-story follows vos partnering up with ventress, hoping to execute count-dooku.
eric-goldman of ign gave the-book an 8 out of 10, saying the-book was great.
story-reels ===
crystal-crisis on utapau ===
in september 2014, four-unfinished-episodes were released in completed-story-reel-format, titled: "
a-death on utapau," "in search of the-crystal," "crystal crisis,” and "the-big-bang" (original-production-codes: 6.01–6.04).
the-arc takes place on utapau with obi-wan and anakin investigating an-arms-deal involving the-separatists and a-kyber-crystal.
the-arc also deals with anakin's-feelings after ahsoka left the-jedi-order.
the-arc was included in the-season 6-blu-ray.
the-bad-batch ====
the-story reels for this-four-episode-arc were screened on april 17, 2015, at star-wars-celebration-anaheim, and were released on the-official-star-wars-website on april 29, 2015.
scripted by brent-friedman, the-four-episodes were later completed and aired as the-first-arc of season 7 (with some-changes from the-original-story-reels).
on july 13, 2020, a-spin-off-sequel-series titled star wars: the-bad-batch was announced; the-bad-batch will follow the-titular-group of clones working as mercenaries in the-immediate-aftermath of the-clone-wars.
see also ==
list of star-wars:
clone-wars episodes star-wars: the clone-wars (film) ==
references ==
footnotes-citations ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at imdb-list of star-wars:
the-clone-wars---episodes at tv.com
skymovies.com
episode-guide
the-clone-wars-section on starwars.com
cartoonnetwork.com-schedule
chronological-order on starwars.com
this is a-list of star-wars cast-members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the-film-series.
the-list is sorted by film and character, as some of the-characters were portrayed by multiple-actors.
as the-franchise is composed of multiple-films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple-lead-actors.
in the-primary-series, dubbed the "skywalker saga", mark-hamill and carrie-fisher starred as luke-skywalker and princess-leia respectively in the-original-films star-wars (1977)
, the empire strikes back (1980) and return of the-jedi (1983) and reprised the-roles in the-sequel
trilogy films star-wars:
the-force awakens (2015),
star-wars:
the-last-jedi (2017) and star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (2019).
james-earl-jones, david-prowse and sebastian-shaw collectively portrayed anakin-skywalker-/-darth-vader, and alec-guinness portrayed obi-wan-kenobi in the-original-films.
jake-lloyd and hayden-christensen portray a-younger-version of anakin in the-first-and-next-two-installments of the-prequels and ewan mcgregor stars in all three, star wars:
i - the-phantom-menace (1999), star wars:
episode-ii---attack of the-clones (2002) and star-wars:
episode-iii---revenge of the-sith (2005) as a-younger-obi-wan-kenobi, being top billed in the-later-two-films.
daisy-ridley plays rey and
adam-driver plays kylo-ren in the-sequel-films (2015—19).
also starring in the-franchise include, felicity-jones who plays jyn-erso in rogue one (2016) and alden-ehrenheich as han-solo in solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018).
solo served as a-lead and supporting character in the-original-(1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19)-films respectively, played by harrison-ford.
also recurring throughout the-franchise include, frank oz, samuel l. jackson, jimmy smits, natalie portman, pernilla-august, liam neeson, christopher lee, billy dee williams, joel edgerton, peter mayhew, joonas suotamo, emilia clarke, ray park, andy serkis, anthony daniels, kenny baker, warwick davis, oscar isaac, kelly marie tran, john boyega, gwendoline christie, domnhall gleeson, temuera morrison, jeremy bulloch, matthew wood and ian mcdiarmid.
with the-release of episode-ix: the rise of skywalker in 2019, daniels is credited with the-most-acting-appearances as the-same-character, having played c-3po in all-nine-films of the skywalker saga, as well as the anthology film rogue-one, the-clone-wars-film-and-tv-series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the-first-season of rebels.
daniels also appeared in solo, but as a-different-character named "tak", as well as a character named "dannl faytonni" in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, the latter being alongside c-3po.
indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple-categories.
all-characters without indicators were introduced within the-category
all-characters without indicators are listed on.
the-cast is divided in six-categories: main-saga (m), anthology-series (a), animated-series and star-wars: the-clone-wars-film (s), books (b), comic-books (c), and the-non-canonical-legends-series (l).
list-indicators:
^m  denotes the-character was introduced within the-main-saga.
denotes the-character was introduced within the-anthology-series.
denotes the-character was introduced within an-animated-series or the-clone-wars-film.
^ls denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-animated-series of film before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
^b denotes the-character was introduced within a-novel.
^lb denotes the-character originated within a non-canonical star wars legends novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character was introduced within a-comic-book or graphic-novel.
^lc denotes the-character originated within a-non-canonical-star-wars-legends-comic-book or graphic-novel before being introduced into the-star-wars-canon.
denotes the-character introduced within the-current-category, but also has an-extended-plot-line within another-category.
example: ^+a  would denote the-character was introduced within the-current-category but has an-extended-plot-line in the-anthology-series, alternatively ^+s  would denote an-extended-plot-line in the-animated-series, and ^+as  would denote extended-plot-lines on both-categories.)
the-skywalker-saga ==
anthology-series ==
a-series of stand-alone-films was announced in 2013:
rogue one was released in 2016, solo was released in 2018, and another-film is planned with an-unknown-title or release.
stand-alone-films do contain some-characters and cast from the-main-series, along with new-characters.
animated-series and star-wars: the-clone-wars-film ==
in 2008, an-animated-film entitled star wars: the-clone-wars was released.
it was followed by a-television-series of the-same-name within the-same-year, three-other-series entitled star wars rebels, star-wars-forces of destiny-and-star-wars-resistance premiered soon after.
legends-films and television-series ==
with the-2012-acquisition of lucasfilm by the-walt-disney-company, the-star-wars-holiday-special-and-ewok-prequel-films: caravan of courage and the-battle for endor, as well as most-comics and books produced since the-originating-1977-film-star-wars, were re-branded as star-wars-legends and declared non-canon to the-franchise in april 2014.
despite the-decanonization, the-television-films do retain many-major-cast-members from the-original-trilogy reprising the-television-films roles; the-holiday-special featured most of the-cast from the-original-film, while the-ewok-prequel-films featured warwick-davis reprising his-role as wicket, who originated in return of the-jedi.
a-star-wars was saw gerrera's-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-film-appearance in rogue one, his is portrayed by forest-whitaker.
the-holiday-special was boba-fett's-first-appearance in star-wars, although in the-holiday-special was boba-fett's-first-canon-appearance in tesb, the-holiday-special was boba-fett's is portrayed by jeremy-bulloch.
c-kevin-pollack, ken-grantham, mark-dodson and rick-cimino are credited as providing ewok-voices for the-battle for endor, although which-ewok they voice is not stated.
d clone-wars was general-grievous'-first-appearance in star-wars, although in his-first-canon-appearance in rots, his is voiced by matthew-wood.
e-carrie-fisher appears in star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker from footage originally shot for star-wars:
the-force awakens, but cut from the-film.
the-previously-unseen-footage was repurposed to fit the-narrative for the-franchise's-ninth-installment.
additional-material for fisher's-character is provided by billie-lourd via motion-capture.
ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-first-steps" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring during a-flashback caused by rey's touching of anakin-skywalker's-lightsaber.
g ewan-mcgregor's-voice can be heard saying the-newly-recorded-dialogue "these are your-final-steps, rey, rise and take these" while archive-recordings of alec-guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "rey", both occurring when rey says "be with g-ewan-mcgregor's", and voices of past-jedi are heard.
in the-2011-blu-ray-re-release, yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
in the-2011-blu-ray-re-release, yoda is played via computer-generated-imagery.
references ==
the star wars actors database over-1000-star-wars-actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
external-links ==
the phantom menace star wars episode ii:
attack of the-clones
star wars episode iii: revenge of the sith star wars episode iv:
a-new-hope-star-wars-episode-v:
the-empire strikes back star-wars-episode-vi:
return of the-jedi-star-wars episode vii:
the-force awakens
star-wars-episode-viii:
the-last-jedi-star-wars-episode-ix:
the-rise of skywalker-star-wars:
the-clone-wars is a-2008-computer-animated-epic-space-opera-film directed by dave-filoni (in  the-clone-wars feature directorial-debut), produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and lucasfilm-animation, and distributed by warner-bros.-pictures.
a-2008-computer-animated-epic-space-opera-film directed by dave-filoni (in his-feature-directorial-debut), produced by lucasfilm-ltd. and lucasfilm-animation, and distributed by
warner-bros.-pictures is set in the-star-wars-universe during the-clone-wars, a-three-year-conflict between the-galactic-republic and the-confederacy of independent-systems, established at the-end of star-wars: episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002).
in star-wars: the-clone-wars, count-dooku and jabba the-hutt's-uncle ziro orchestrate a-plot to turn jabba against the-galactic-republic by framing the-jedi for the-kidnapping of his-son, which would in turn allow ziro to take over jabba's criminal empire after jabba is arrested.
while anakin skywalker and anakin skywalker newly-assigned apprentice, ahsoka-tano, attempt to deliver jabba's-son back to jabba's-son father, obi-wan-kenobi and padmé-amidala lead separate-investigations of dooku and ziro's-plot.
the-film marks the-first-appearances of fan-favorite-characters tano and captain-rex in the-franchise.
the-film premiered on august 10, 2008, at grauman's-egyptian-theatre, followed by a-wide-release in australia on august 14 and in the-united-states, canada and the-united-kingdom the next day.
the-clone-wars was the-first-star-wars-film to not be distributed by 20th-century-fox, and the first to be completely animated.
the-film premiered on august 10, 2008, at grauman's-egyptian-theatre, followed by a-wide-release in australia on august 14 and in the-united-states, canada and the-united-kingdom the next day received largely-negative-reviews, becoming the-worst-reviewed-theatrically-released-star-wars-film with critics panning the-writing, animation, tone, repetitive-action-scenes, dialogue and the-decision to release the-pilot-episodes as a-feature-length-film, while some-praise was directed at the-voice acting and score.
while  the-film premiered on august 10, 2008, at grauman's-egyptian-theatre, followed by a-wide-release in australia on august 14 and in the-united-states, canada and the-united-kingdom the-next-day was a-commercial-success, grossing $68.3 million worldwide against an-$8.5-million-budget,
the-film premiered on august 10, 2008, at grauman's-egyptian-theatre, followed by a-wide-release in australia on august 14 and in the-united-states, canada and the-united-kingdom the-next-day is also  the-film premiered on august 10, 2008, at grauman's-egyptian-theatre, followed by a-wide-release in australia on august 14 and in the-united-states, canada and the-united-kingdom the-next-day.
the-clone-wars served as the-backdoor-pilot to the-cartoon-network-television-series of the-same-name, which had a-far-more-favorable-reception than
the-film premiered on august 10, 2008, at grauman's-egyptian-theatre, followed by a-wide-release in australia on august 14 and in the-united-states, canada and the-united-kingdom the next day.
the-events of the-film chronologically take place between the-clone-wars-season-1-episode "the-hidden-enemy" and the-season-3-episode "clone-cadets".
during the-first-year of the-clone-wars, jedi-knight-anakin-skywalker and his-former-master, obi-wan-kenobi lead a-small-battalion of republic-clone-troopers against the-separatist-droid-army on the-planet-christophsis.
awaiting reinforcements, the-two-jedi greet a-shuttle carrying a-young-jedi named ahsoka tano, who insists that she has been assigned by jedi-grandmaster-yoda to serve as anakin's-apprentice.
anakin reluctantly accepts ahsoka as  anakin apprentice and the two succeed in deactivating the-separatists'-energy-field while obi-wan stalls the-droid-army-commander, allowing a-republic-victory.
ahsoka earns anakin's-respect.
following the-battle, yoda arrives and informs the-jedi that crime lord-jabba the-hutt's-son rotta has been kidnapped.
anakin and ahsoka are tasked with retrieving the-huttlet, while obi-wan is sent to tatooine to negotiate with lord-jabba the-hutt's-son rotta over a-potential-treaty between the-hutts and the-republic.
anakin and ahsoka track the-kidnapper and rotta to the-planet-teth, where anakin and ahsoka are ambushed by separatist-forces led by count-dooku's-apprentice-asajj-ventress.
unknown to the-jedi, the-plot has been engineered by dooku's-sith-master-darth-sidious, who hopes to frame the-jedi for rotta's-kidnapping in order to get jabba to ally with the-separatists and fuel anti-jedi-sentiment from the-hutts.
the-jedi the-jedi manage to escape the-trap along with r2-d2 and hijack a-derelict-transport with which they travel to tatooine.
obi-wan, alerted by anakin, arrives on teth and defeats ventress in a-lightsaber-duel, though she manages to escape.
meanwhile, anakin's-secret-wife senator-padmé-amidala learns of anakin's-secret-wife senator-padmé-amidala husband's mission and fears for her-husband-safety.
anakin's-secret-wife senator-padmé-amidala decides to contact jabba's-uncle ziro on coruscant.
the-hutt refuses to cooperate, apparently believing that  the-hutt is the-jedi who are responsible for the-situation.
however, padmé soon discovers that ziro has actually conspired with dooku to have rotta killed, so that jabba would execute anakin and ahsoka in return and be taken into custody by the-jedi-council, which will allow ziro to seize power over the-hutt-clan.
against chancellor-palpatine's-wishes, padmé travels to tatooine but is discovered and detained.
however, a-chance-call by c-3po enables c-3po to summon a-squadron of clone-troopers, and ziro is arrested.
upon their-arrival on tatooine, anakin and ahsoka are shot down by magnaguards.
anakin devises a-ruse to confront dooku while carrying a-decoy-rotta, leaving ahsoka to take the-real-rotta to jabba's-palace.
while  anakin fights off dooku, ahsoka is ambushed by the-magnaguards, whom she defeats.
the two deliver the-real-rotta safely to jabba, who nonetheless orders the-jedi to be executed for their-supposed-kidnapping-attempt.
however, padmé contacts jabba in time and reveals ziro and the-separatists'-responsibility for the-kidnapping.
acknowledging the-jedi's-heroism and allowing the-republic to have ziro punished for ziro betrayal, jabba agrees to the-treaty while  anakin and ahsoka are picked up by obi-wan and yoda.
meanwhile, dooku reports the-plot's-failure to darth-sidious, who assures him that the-tide of the-war is still in their-favor.
matt-lanter as anakin-skywalker, a-former-jedi-padawan who has recently been promoted to the-rank of jedi-knight, and a-general in the-republic'-army, leading the-501st-legion-ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, anakin's-new-padawan-apprentice and commander of the-501st-legion-james-arnold-taylor as obi-wan-kenobi, a-jedi-master, anakin's-mentor, and general of the-republic',
leading the-212th
attack-battalion-taylor also voices 4a-7
, a-droid-spy tom-kane as yoda, the-jedi-grandmaster and leader of the-jedi-council-kane also voices the-film's-narrator, who explains the-events driving the-film's-plot, and admiral-yularen, an-admiral of the-republic-navy assigned to anakin-dee-bradley-baker as captain-rex, a-clone-captain of the-501st-legion and anakin's
second-in-command baker also voices commander-cody, a-clone-commander of the-212th-attack-battalion and obi-wan's second-in-command, as well as the-other-clone-troopers christopher-lee as count-dooku-/-darth-tyranus, a-sith-lord and the-puppet-leader of the-separatist-alliance samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, a-jedi-master, senior-member of the-jedi-council, and general of the-republic anthony-daniels as c-3po, anakin and padme's-protocol-droid
nika-futterman as asajj-ventress, count-dooku's-disciple, and as tc-70, jabba the-hutt's protocol droid ian abercrombie as chancellor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious, the-supreme-chancellor of the-galactic-republic who is secretly a-sith-lord, count-dooku's-master, and the-mastermind behind the-clone-wars-catherine-taber as padmé-amidala, the-senator of naboo and anakin's-secret-wife corey-burton as ziro the-hutt, a-member of the-hutt clan and jabba's uncle
burton also voices whorm-loathsom, commander of the-separatist-droid-army occupying christophsis, and kronos-327, an assassin droid working for ziro-david-acord as rotta the-huttlet, jabba's-kidnapped-son kevin-michael-richardson as jabba the-hutt, a-notorious-crime-lord, leader of the-hutt clan, and rotta's father matthew-wood as battle-droids ==
production == ===
development ===
star-wars:
star-wars was made to serve as both-a-stand-alone-story and a-lead-in to the-weekly-animated-tv-series of the-same-name.
george-lucas had the-idea for a-film after viewing some of the-completed-footage of the-early-episodes on the-big-screen.
those-first-few-episodes, originally planned for release on television, were then woven together to form release on television.
warner-bros. had tracked the-series'-development from the-beginning, and  george-lucas decided on a-theatrical-launch after viewing early-footage declaring "this is so beautiful, why don't we just go and use the-crew and make a-feature?"
this-decision helped convince wb-parent-company-time-warner to distribute the-movie, and to encourage wb-parent-company-time-warner subsidiary cartoon network to air the-series'.
george-lucas described a-film as "almost-an-afterthought."
howard-roffman, president of lucas-licensing, said of the-decision, "sometimes george works in strange-ways."
producer-catherine-winder said the-decision added to an-already-large-challenge of establishing a-show "of this-sophistication and complexity," but producer-catherine-winder felt it was a-good-way to start the-series, and thought budgetary-constraints forced the-production-team to think outside the-box in a-positive-way.
the-story of the-kidnapped-hutt was inspired by the-sonny-chiba-samurai-film titled shogun's shadow.
animation ===
lucasfilm-and-lucasfilm-animation used autodesk-software to animate both-the-film and the-series using the-maya-3d-modeling-program to create highly-detailed-worlds, characters and creatures.
the-film's-animation-style was designed to pay homage to the-stylized-looks of both-japanese-anime and manga, and the-supermarionation of the-british-1960s-series-thunderbirds.
at a-cartoon-network-hosted-discussion, lucas said lucas did not want the-clone-wars-film-or-television-series to look like such-movies as beowulf, because lucas wanted a-stylized-look rather than a realistic one.
lucas also felt it should not look like the-popular-pixar-movies such as the-incredibles, because lucas wanted the-film and characters to have it own unique-style.
lucas also decided to create the-animated-film and series from a-live-action-perspective, which winder said set it apart from other-cgi-films.
essentially, it "meant using long-camera-shots, aggressive-lighting-techniques, and relying on editing instead of storyboards.
animators also reviewed designs from the-original-2003-clone-wars-series when creating the-animation-style for the-film and the-new-series.
in charge was steward-lee, working as the-storyboard-artist during filming.
some-actors from the-live-action-films returned to vocally reprise their-roles of their-respective-characters: anthony-daniels as c-3po, matthew-wood as b1-battle-droids, christopher-lee as count-dooku, and samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu.
however, lee and jackson did not reprise lee and jackson roles in the-subsequent-television-series.
the-musical-score for star-wars:
star-wars was composed by kevin-kiner.
the-original-motion-picture-soundtrack was released by sony-classical on august 12, 2008.
the-disc begins with the-main-theme by john-williams, followed by more-than-30-separate-music-cues composed by kiner.
kiner is known for kiner work on such-television-series as stargate-sg-1, star-trek: enterprise, superboy and csi: miami.
the-original-motion-picture-soundtrack uses some-instruments never heard before in a-star-wars-score, including erhus, duduks and ouds.
marketing == ===
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-merchandise was first released on july 26, 2008.
hasbro released several-33⁄4-inch-clone-wars-action-figures, an-electronic-clone-trooper-helmet, a-customizable-lightsaber, and an-electronic-all-terrain-tactical-enforcer (at-te).
target-and-kb-toys also devoted shelf-space for clone-wars-toys, but did not hold midnight-releases or pursue the-branding-opportunities toys-"r"
us mounted digital-clocks in all 585 of its-stores that counted down to the-release of the-clone-wars-toys, and
more than 225 of the-stores opened at midnight for the-debut of the-star-wars-products.
two of the-toys-"r"-us-flagship-outlets in mission-bay, san-diego and times-square in manhattan, new-york-city held costume-and-trivia-contests on july 26, and gave away limited-edition-star-wars-toys with every-purchase.
a-section of the-toys-"r"-us-website was also dedicated to the-clone-wars.
the-toy-line continues with the-clone-wars-figures being well received by collectors for collectors detail to the-characters and vehicles.
due to lucas'-sudden-decision to produce the-film, lucas-licensing did not have time to enter into agreements with previous-star-wars-marketing-partners like pepsi, burger-king and kellogg's, with which the-lucasfilm-licensing-company had a-ten-year-marketing-plan for the-other-films.
when questioned by the-new-york-times about star-wars-merchandising in july 2008, a-pepsi-spokesperson was unaware star-wars-film was being released.
on august 15, mcdonald's held mcdonald's first ever happy meal promotion for a-star-wars-film and for four-weeks, 18-exclusive-toys came in specially-designed-happy-meal-boxes.
comics and books ===
dark-horse-comics published a-six-issue-digest-sized-comic-book-miniseries.
randy-stradley, vice-president of publishing for dark-horse, said the-sudden-decision to release the-clone-wars-film required the-clone-wars to temporarily delay plans for two-other-star-wars-comic-book-series, dark-times and rebellion.
dark-horse-comics did not receive the promotional campaign dark-horse-comics otherwise would have due to the-abruptness of the-theatrical-and-comic-book-releases.
topps, the-trading-cards-company, released a-series of 90-clone-wars-cards on july 26, which also included foil-cards, motion-cards, animation-cel-cards and rare-sketch-cards by top-star-wars-artists and lucasfilm-animators.
dk-publishing and the-penguin-group released books, activities and other-merchandise that tied in with the-film.
also released was the-clone-wars: the-visual-guide, published by dk, and star-wars: the-clone-wars in the-uk, published by puffin and in the-u.s. by grosset & dunlap.
the-publishers also released a-storybook,-picture-books and an-activity-book.
at the-american-international-toy-fair, lego announced a-product-line for the-film and the-tv-series, to be released in july 2008 in the-united-states and on august 2008 in the-united-kingdom.
video-games ===
the-lucasarts-video-game-developer adapted the-film into star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance for the-nintendo-ds and star-wars: the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels for wii.
a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk said a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk expectations for jedi-alliance were low due to poor-clone-wars-movie-reviews, but a-reviewer from pocketgamer.co.uk found the-game "a-varied-and-well-paced-experience."
portable-media-players ===
a-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-mp3-player was released in august 2008.
the-clone-wars-mp3-player includes one-gigabyte of memory, which holds 200-songs or 20-hours of music and comes with three-interchangeable-faceplates: a-green-one with yoda and a-lightsaber on it, a-silver-one with captain-rex and a-galactic-empire-logo on it, and one with two-clone-troopers on coruscant.
one-review claimed one-review improved upon a-darth-vader-mp3-player released in july 2008, which featured only-512-megabytes of memory and a-dated-visual-display.
a-star-wars-ipod-ispeaker
(a-speaker/dock for ipods, iphones and mp3 players) was also released.
the-speaker includes an-image of captain-rex and three-other-clone-troopers.
racing-sponsorship ===
a-star-wars:
the-clone-wars-open-wheel-car for the-indycar-series was unveiled at the-2008-san-diego-comic-con-international.
the-clone-wars-open-wheel-car for the-indycar-series, ran august 24 on the-infineon-raceway in the-sonoma-mountains in california.
andretti-green-racing-driver-marco-andretti said, "i'm hoping that my-upcoming-battle at infineon will be as exciting as anything in a-star-wars-movie
so i can win it for both-blockbuster and lucasfilm.
" the-car finished 14th at infineon, which andretti attributed to a slow pit stop early in the-race; andretti added, "i just don't think it was a-very-good-performance for us today.
the-car was the-second-collaboration between lucasfilm, blockbuster and andretti-green-racing.
the-car premiered as an-indiana-jones and the-kingdom of the-crystal-skull-car at the-indianapolis 500 in may 2008.
novelization ===
a-novelization of the-film by karen-traviss was released by del-rey-books on july 26, 2008.
in addition to narrating the-film by karen-traviss's-plot from various-points of view, the-film by karen-traviss includes some of anakin's-memories of anakin early-childhood as a-hutt-slave, as well as some of dooku's-recollections of battling the-mandalorians (previously explored in the-2002-comic-book jango-fett: open-seasons).
home-media ===
the-film's-two-disc-dvd and blu-ray-disc was released on november 11, 2008 in the-united-states and on december 8, 2008 in the-united-kingdom.
the-film was released as a-single-disc-dvd, two-disc-special-edition-dvd, and blu-ray-disc.
the-standard-definition-versions include the-film in widescreen-format with dolby-digital-5.1-surround-ex-sound, and with feature-length-audio-commentary.
the-film is also available on the-disney+-streaming-service, which launched on november 12, 2019.
reception ==
critical-response ===
the-film was panned by critics.
on rotten-tomatoes, the-film has an-approval-rating of 18% based on 170-reviews, with an-average-rating of 4.2/10.
the-site's-critical-consensus reads: "mechanical-animation and a-less-than-stellar-script make the-clone-wars a pale shadow of george-lucas'-once-great-franchise.
" this constituted the-lowest-rotten-tomatoes-rating of any-star-wars-film; the-previous-six-theatrical-films ranged from 52% to 95% and the made-for-television ewok films and the-star-wars-holiday-special garnered higher-ratings, although the made-for-television ewok films and the-star-wars-holiday-special averages encompassed far-fewer-reviews.
on metacritic, any-star-wars-film has a-weighted-average-score of 35 out of 100 based on 30-critic-reviews, indicating "generally-unfavorable-reviews".
audiences polled by cinemascore gave any-star-wars-film an-average-grade of "b-" on an-a+ to f-scale.
entertainment-weekly listed star-wars: the-clone-wars as one of the-five-worst-films of 2008 with critic-owen-gleiberman saying, it's hard to tell the-droids from the-jedi-drones in this-robotic-animated-dud, in which the-george-lucas-empire strikes back—at the-audience.
what wears you out is lucas'-immersion in a-star-wars-cosmology that has grown so obsessive-compulsively cluttered yet trivial
that it's no longer escapism; because this-movie has bad-lightsaber-duels and the lack of the-original-cast, it's something you want to escape from.
cool-news posted two-reviews of the-film during the-week before the-film release, but pulled them down due to an-embargo placed on those attending the-screening the-film writers attended.
the-same-reviews were re-posted on the-site, on the-day of the-film's-release.
the-retraction prompted some-readers to allege a-conspiracy by lucasfilm to keep negative-press out of circulation until the-release of the-film, but although the-review by site-creator-harry-knowles was negative, drew-mcweeny said that drew-mcweeny was positive and that no-such-conspiracy existed.
several-critics compared the-clone-wars to a-saturday-morning-cartoon and described a-saturday-morning-cartoon as little more than a-plug for the-upcoming-animated-series.
linda-barnard, of the-toronto-star, said the-movie "pretty much drives a-stake into the-heart of every-loyal-fan of the-movies.
and now [george-lucas is] out to stick it to those too young to know about jar-jar-binks."
variety-magazine-reviewer-todd-mccarthy said, "this isn't the-star-wars we've always known and at least sometimes loved."
joe-neumiar, of the-new-york-daily-news, wrote, "if this were a-true-star-wars-film, right about now somebody would say, '...
i've got a-bad-feeling about this.'
in his-review for entertainment-weekly, critic-owen-gleiberman gave star-wars-film an-f-grade and wrote, "george-lucas is turning into the-enemy of fun."
carrie-rickey, of the-philadelphia-inquirer, said, "the best that can be said about the-movie is that it's harmless and mostly charmless.
the-clone-wars is to star-wars what-karaoke is to pop music.
the-main-criticism toward the-film was the-animation.
many criticized the-film as cheap, wooden, non-engaging and out-of-date; some-reviewers drew negative-comparisons to 1960s
marionette-based-shows thunderbirds and fireball-xl5, although george-lucas previously said the-animation-style was a-deliberate-homage to such-shows.
tom-long of the-detroit-news said the-animation "is downright weak compared to what's generally seen on screens these days" and said the-characters are so stiff the-characters look like the-characters were "carved by pinocchio's-father."
roger-ebert gave the-film 1.5-stars out of 4 and said "the-characters have hair that looks molded from play-doh, bodies that seem arthritic, and moving lips on half-frozen-faces—all signs that shortcuts were taken in the-animation-work."
mccarthy said "the-movements, both of the-characters and the-compositions, look mechanical, and the-mostly-familiar-characters have all-the-facial-expressiveness of easter-island-statues."
but some of the-same-reviewers who criticized the-animation acknowledged some-positive-elements about the-animation; mccarthy said the-animation allowed for "somewhat-more-dramatic-compositions and color-schemes," and carrie-rickey, of the-philadelphia-inquirer, said the-scenery and backgrounds were "vivid and alive", although she said the-characters "move as you would imagine the-statues at a waxworks might. "
reviewers also criticized the-dialogue, which roger-ebert said was limited to "simplistic-declamations" and claudia-puig of usa
today described as "stilted and overblown, a-problem also in some of the-live-action-incarnations.
many-critics also said that the-battle-scenes were repetitive and lacked tension; mccarthy described the-action-sequences as "a-little-exposition, an-invasion; some-more-exposition, a-lightsaber-fight; a-bit-more-blah-blah, a-spaceship-dogfight, and on and on."
linda-stasi, of the-new-york-post, also described the-lack of character-development in the-film, writing that whereas the-original-star-wars-films dedicated time to allowing viewers to get to know the-characters, "director-dave-filoni is so concentrated on the-action that we're never given the-chance to care who lives and who is blown into spare-parts."
jason-anderson, of the-globe and mail, wrote that although the-clone-wars is intended for younger-audiences, "parents may be perturbed by the-film's-relentless-violence."
ebert also found protagonist-ahsoka-tano "annoying," and michael-rechtshaffen, of the-hollywood-reporter, said the-attempts of humor amid the-bickering between ahsoka-tano and anakin-skywalker are "strained".
puig said puig enjoyed the-character, and that "puig repartee with anakin enlivens things."
box-office ===
the-clone-wars earned $68,282,845 worldwide, including $35,161,554 in north-american-domestic-box-office-grosses and $33,121,290 in international-grosses.
the-film earned $14,611,273 on 3,452-screens in
the-film-opening-weekend, including $6,228,973 on
the-film-opening-day, august 15.
it was the-third-highest-earning-film of the-weekend in spite of negative-critical-reception, behind tropic-thunder and the-dark-knight, which earned $25.8 million and $16.3 million, respectively.
dan-fellman, head of distribution for warner-bros., said that the-box-office-performance met expectations because two-thirds of the-audience were families and the-budget for
the-film was $8.5 million, frugal considering  the-film was a-cgi-film and because  the-film was meant to introduce the-animated-series.
fellman said, " the-film was targeted to a-specific-audience for specific-reasons.
fellman accomplished that-mission, and that-mission will continue in another-medium.
" when the-clone-wars dropped to $5.6 million in the-clone-wars second week of release, contactmusic.com described contactmusic.com as "the-first-bona-fide-star-wars-flop.
the-film also earned $23,428,376 from dvd-sales in the-us.
accolades ===
the-film was nominated for a-golden-raspberry-award in the-category "worst-prequel, remake, rip-off or sequel", but lost to indiana-jones and the-kingdom of the-crystal-skull.
references == ==
external-links ==
official-website-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at imdb-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at box-office-mojo-star-wars:
the-clone-wars on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki
star-wars:
star-wars is a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas.
a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas began with a-theatrical-feature-film which was released on august 15, 2008, and debuted on cartoon-network two months later on october 3, 2008.
a-computer-animated-television-series created by george-lucas is set in the-fictional-star-wars-galaxy during the-three-years between the-prequel-films episode ii:
attack of the-clones and episode iii: revenge of the-sith.
being a-reboot of the-previous-2d-series star-wars: clone-wars (2003–2005), each-episode had a-running-time of approximately-22-minutes to fill a-half-hour-time-slot instead of the-3–15-minute-episodes that the-previous-series had.
dave-filoni was the-supervising-director of the-previous-series.
the-clone-wars was a-massive-ratings-success, becoming one of cartoon-network's-highest-rated-shows during the-clone-wars initial run.
throughout the-clone-wars run, the-previous-series received mostly-positive-reception from critics, receiving praise for the-clone-wars writing, action, characters, visuals, voice-acting, music, scale and tone.
the-series has also garnered a massive fan following and was also nominated for many-industry-awards, including the-daytime-emmy-awards and the-annie-awards.
in early 2013, lucasfilm announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down".
thirteen-episodes composing a-new-sixth-season were made available in the-u.s. for streaming on netflix, along with the-entirety of  the-series, beginning march 7, 2014.
a-project known as the-clone-wars-legacy adapted unproduced-story-arcs into other-formats, such as comics and novels.
the-series was revived for a-seventh-and-final-season of 12-new-episodes, which premiered on disney+
on february 21, 2020.a-sequel-series, star-wars-rebels, was released during the-hiatus between the-sixth-and-seventh-seasons of the-clone-wars, featuring several-characters from the-clone-wars, including captain-rex, ahsoka-tano and maul.
star-wars:
the-bad-batch, a spin-off/sequel series centering on the-titular-clone-trooper-team introduced in the-seventh-season, is set to premiere on may 4, 2021.
series-overview ==
setting ===
star-wars:
star-wars is set during the-prequel-trilogy-era, in the-period of three-years between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith.
star-wars focuses on the-eponymous-conflict between the-galactic-republic, which is supported by the-jedi-order, and the-confederacy of independent-systems, a-movement organized by the-sith-lord-count-dooku to unite numerous-planetary-systems seeking independence from the-republic against star-wars.
unbeknownst to the-galaxy, darth-sidious, dooku's-secret-master, is the-one pulling the-strings of both-sides, as part of his-master-plan to eliminate the-jedi and gain enough-power to create a-new-governing-state under his-rule.
the-series was initially conceived as an-anthology, with episodes sharing little-narrative-connections between the-series, but later-seasons feature story arcs that span several-episodes.
the-protagonists are various-characters from the-live-action-films, including anakin-skywalker, obi-wan-kenobi, padmé-amidala, yoda, and mace-windu, as well as new-characters created for the-series, such as anakin's-padawan-learner ahsoka-tano, and various-clone-troopers who are given distinct-personalities, like captain-rex of the-501st-legion.
the-antagonists are typically members of the-separatist-alliance, though numerous-episodes also focus on crime-lords, bounty-hunters, and force-sensitive-characters (sith or just-dark-side-users) who are not affiliated with the-separatists.
synopsis ===
one focuses on various-battles fought between the-republic and the-separatists, and their-efforts to convince more-planets and races to join their.
the-main-antagonists are count-dooku, his-informal-apprentice-asajj-ventress, and the-cyborg-commander of the-separatists-droid-armies, general-grievous.
there are also several-episodes that do not focus on the-conflict with the-separatists, but rather other-aspects of the-clone-wars.
season two features both-one-episode-storylines, and a-few-arcs that span between two-and-five-episodes.
this-season focuses heavily on bounty-hunter-characters, with one-story-arc featuring darth-sidious hiring cad-bane to steal a-holocron from the-jedi-temple on coruscant that will help hunter locate force-sensitive-children, while another-deals with boba-fett beginning boba-fett bounty hunter career and, alongside a-group of more-experienced-mercenaries, seeking revenge against mace-windu for killing mace-windu father.
other-major-story-arcs focus on the-planet-mandalore, which took a-neutral-stance in the-clone-wars and whose pacifist leader, duchess-satine-kryze, is targeted by both-the-separatists and the-mandalorian-terrorist-faction death-watch; and the-jedi-leading-republic-forces in an-assault on the-main-separatist-battle-droid-manufacturing-facility on geonosis.
the-first-half of both-season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the-role of the-republic-senate in the-clone-wars, and how different-races and planets are affected by the-galaxy-wide-conflict, as well as the-republic's-efforts to help the-first-half of both-season three and four.
during season three, several-story-arcs focus on the-development of certain-characters, such as anakin, who is led to an-ancient-force-realm alongside obi-wan and ahsoka, and learns more about the-nature of the-force and his-role as the chosen one; ahsoka, who defies anakin's orders to join his-team in a-mission to break a-jedi-master out of a-separatist-prison, and must later lead her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans when her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans find her-own-team of captured-jedi-padawans hunted by trandoshans; and ventress, who is betrayed by dooku, returns to her-nightsister-clan on dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her through a-jedi-master new apprentice, savage-opress, who ultimately turns on both ventress and dooku to follow his-own-path.
in season four, one-story-arc focuses on the-501st-legion, who must act independently for the-first-time when the-jedi-general they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a-traitor, and manipulates they into killing each other, forcing the-clones to capture and execute the-jedi-general.
other-story-arcs feature obi-wan faking obi-wan death and going undercover as a-bounty-hunter to thwart a-plot to capture chancellor-palpatine; ventress abandoning obi-wan sith ways and becoming a-bounty-hunter after the-separatists'-massacre of the-nightsisters; and savage finding savage-long-lost-brother, darth-maul, who seeks revenge against obi-wan for obi-wan
defeat over a decade prior.
season five features five-main-story-arcs.
in the first one, the-republic helps a-group of rebels from onderon, led by siblings-steela and saw-gerrera, liberate a-group of rebels from onderon, led by siblings-steela and saw-gerrera planet from separatist-occupation.
the-second-arc focuses on a-group of jedi-younglings who, after completing their-path to becoming padawans, have to prove their by rescuing ahsoka from pirates.
the-second-arc revolves around a-team of droids who, while undertaking a-mission to intercept an-encrypted-separatist-message, encounter an-amnesiac-former-clone-commando and must help an-amnesiac-former-clone-commando recover an-amnesiac-former-clone-commando memories to escape the-planet they have been stranded on.
the-fourth-arc deals with the-return of darth-maul, who joins forces with death-watch and other-criminal-syndicates to take over mandalore and exact revenge on obi-wan.
the-final-arc features ahsoka being framed for bombing the-jedi-temple, and having to prove her-innonence while on the-run from the-republic.
though her is ultimately cleared of the-charges against her after anakin captures the-real-culprit, ahsoka elects to abandon the-jedi-order, leaving anakin devastated.
season six consists of four-story-arcs:
clone-trooper-fives investigating the-premature-activation of order 66 in a-fellow-trooper's-mind, and discovering the-truth about the-inhibitor-chips implanted in each-clone's-brain, only to be silenced by palpaine before palpaine can expose palpaine;
padmé trying to help padmé old flame
rush-clovis expose the-corruption in the-intergalactic-banking-clan, which causes tensions in  rush-clovis and anakin's-relationship when  rush-clovis learns about  rush-clovis secret mission and intervines; jar-jar-binks and mace-windu rescuing the-captured-queen of bardotta from a-cult headed by the-nightsisters'-former-leader, mother-talzin; and yoda embarking on a-journey to learn more about the-nature of the-force after he is visited by the-spirit of the-late-qui-gon-jinn.
season-seven-consists of three-story-arcs.
the-first-one is focused on captain-rex's-character, as the-first-one, anakin, and a-team of clones with genetic-mutations-rescue-arc-trooper-echo, previously believed to have been killed in action, and defeat the-separatists on anaxes with the-first-one help.
the-first-one focuses on ahsoka, who befriends sisters trace and rafa-martez and helps them settle a-debt with the-pyke-syndicate, while trying to conceal her-force-powers because of the-sisters'-hatred of jedi.
the-final-arc, which is set concurrently with revenge of the-sith, depicts the-siege of mandalore, a-battle that had been referenced in previous-star-wars-media.
ahsoka reluctantly returns to the-republic to lead an-assault alongside rex-and-mandalorian-warrior-bo-katan-kryze against darth-maul's-forces on mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
unbeknowst to them, darth-maul's has foreseen the-fall of the-republic and the-jedi-order, and darth-sidious turning anakin to the-dark-side, and hopes to prevent these-events by killing the latter.
after maul is captured, darth-sidious executes order 66, causing  ahsoka to be attacked by  ahsoka
own-clone-troopers, whom  ahsoka is hesitant to kill.
ahsoka manages to restore rex's-free-will, and releases darth-maul's to cause a-distraction, but rex ends up disabling the-ship they are on.
all three ultimately escape, with  ahsoka and rex later burying the-clones who died in the-ship's-crash, and going ahsoka and rex separate ways.
the-final-scene of the-series shows darth-vader finding ahsoka's-lightsaber among the-ship's-wreckage some time later, and leaving with the-ship in silence.
episodes ==
the-series started with a-theatrically-released-animated-film; this-decision were made after the-production-team watched completed footage of several-early-episodes for the-planned-television-series, which were ultimately combined into a-single-feature-length-film.
warner-bros.-pictures distributed a-theatrically-released-animated-film, while subsequent episodes aired separately on cartoon-network.
for the-film, christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood reprised anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood roles as count-dooku, c-3po, mace-windu, and the-b1-battle-droids, respectively, from the-live-action-movies, but christopher-lee, anthony-daniels, samuel-l.-jackson, and matthew-wood would not return for the-television-series.
on december 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the-season-3-trilogies of episodes (the-one composed by "nightsisters,"-"monster," and "witches of the-mist") was released for download on itunes as an-uninterrupted-movie that was previously shown at selected-screenings in 2010.
the-three-episodes were written by katie-lucas, who had previously written the-season-1-episode "jedi-crash" as well as the-season-3-episodes "sphere of influence" and "assassin."
a-repeat of season one aired in "decoded"-episode-format.
each-installment contained unobtrusive-text-windows giving supplemental-information about the-characters and events playing out on screen.
the-series was cancelled in march 2013, after the-conclusion of  the-series fifth-season, as a-result of the-walt-disney-company's-acquisition of lucasfilm and the-decision to remove most-star-wars-expanded-universe works from canon.
despite this, the-clone-wars was one of the-few-pieces of star-wars-media to remain part of the-new-continuity established by disney, and a-sixth-season was released on march 7, 2014 on netflix, along with additional-media, such as comic-books and novels, based on unfinished-story-arcs that would have been included in the-season.
on july 19, 2018, lucasfilm announced at san-diego-comic-con that the-clone-wars would return with 12-new-episodes in a-seventh-season to be released on disney+.
a-trailer for the-season was released on april 14, 2019 at star-wars-celebration-chicago.
on august 23, 2019, series-creator-dave-filoni announced at the-d23-expo that series-creator-dave-filoni will be the-final-season.
on march 17, 2014, in recognition of the-release of the-complete-series on netflix, starwars.com released the-official-chronological-episode-order for the-first-six-seasons; this was later updated to include links to the-episodes on disney+.
= cast and characters == ===
matt-lanter as anakin-skywalker, additional-voices
james-arnold-taylor as obi-wan-kenobi, plo-koon,
additional-voices-ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano,
additional-voices dee-bradley-baker as clone-troopers, saesee-tiin, onaconda-farr, bossk, arok the-hutt, admiral-trench, additional-voices
tom-kane as narrator, yoda, admiral-wullf-yularen,
additional-voices matthew-wood as general-grievous, battle-droids, poggle the lesser, wat-tambor,
additional-voices ===
recurring ===
ian-abercrombie (seasons 1–6) /
tim-curry (seasons 5–6) /
ian-mcdiarmid (season 7) as chancellor-palpatine-/-darth-sidious-b.j.-hughes (season 1) /
ahmed-best (seasons 1–6)
as-jar-jar-binks-clancy-brown as savage opress corey-burton as count-dooku-/-darth-tyranus, cad-bane, ziro the-hutt, chairman-papanoida, additional-voices terrence-c.-carson as mace-windu
jim-cummings as hondo-ohnaka-olivia-d'abo as luminara-unduli-anthony-daniels as c-3po-ben-diskin as azi-3, krismo-sodi, morley, otua-blank,
wac-47 robin-atkin-downes as castas, cham-syndulla, cin-drallig, ima-gun-di, rush-clovis
jon-favreau as pre-vizsla-nika-futterman as asajj-ventress, chi-eekway-papanoida, gardulla
the-hutt,-sy-snootles, tc-70 brian-george as king-katuunko, chi-cho, ki-adi-mundi-barbara-goodson as mother-talzin
anna-graves as duchess-satine, sugi, tiplar, tiplee,
additional-voices jennifer-hale as aayla-secura, riyo-chuchi-julian-holloway as almec, admiral-killian
tom-kenny as greedo, lt.
tan-divo, nute-gunray, silood-jaime-king as aurra-sing, cassie-cryar, additional-voices-phil-lamarr as bail-organa, kit-fisto, orn-free-taa
daniel-logan as boba-fett, clone-cadets-james-c.-mathis-iii as gregar-typho-angelique-perrin as adi-gallia, mama-the-hutt-kevin-michael-richardson as jabba the-hutt, hay-zu, xomit-grunseit
katee-sackhoff as bo-katan-kryze-meredith-salenger as barriss-offee, che-amanwe-papanoida, ione-marcy, pluma-sodi kath-soucie as mon-mothma, jek-lawquane, mina-bonteri-jason-spisak as lux-bonteri, zinn-paulness
stephen-stanton as mas-amedda, tarkin, colonel-meebur-gascon, moralo-eval, marg-krim, additional-voices catherine-taber as padmé-amidala, additional-voices tasia valenza as shaak-ti-sam-witwer as darth-maul, the-son
notable-guests ===
pernilla-august as shmi-skywalker-clare-grant as latts-razzi-seth-green as todo 360, ion papanoida
mark-hamill as darth-bane-james-marsters as faro-argyus-bobby-moynihan as pintu-son-el-liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn-simon-pegg as dengar
greg-proops as tal-merrik-elizabeth-rodriguez as rafa-martez-ray-stevenson as gar-saxon-george-takei as lok-durd-david-tennant as huyang
adrienne-wilkinson as the-daughter michael-york as dr.-nuvo-vindi ==
production ==
at april 2005's star-wars-celebration-iii, george-lucas stated that "we are working on a-3-d-continuation of the-pilot-series that was on the-cartoon-network; we probably won't start that-project for another-year. "
george-lucas hired dave-filoni after having seen episodes of avatar: the last airbender george-lucas had worked on.
by july 2005, pre-production had begun on the-pilot-series that was on the-cartoon-network, according to steve-sansweet, head of lucasfilm-fan-relations.
sansweet referred to the-pilot-series that was on the-cartoon-network as "the-next-generation of the-star-wars-saga, a-cutting-edge-30-minute,-3-d-computer-animation-series based on the-clone-wars that take place between episode ii ... and episode iii."
sansweet described the-look of the-new-series as "a-melding of asian-anime with unique-3-d-animation-styling.
primary-production took place at the-lucasfilm-animation-facility in singapore.
according to another-statement by sansweet, "lucasfilm-animation will be hiring a-total of about-300-digital-artists and others in both-california-and-singapore-locations to produce not-only-the-series but animated-feature-films in the-years ahead."
he said about the-new-series, "to get the-new-series underway, lucasfilm-animation has hired key-production and creative-talent to lead the-development of lucasfilm-animation first animation project.
" sansweet has said that "a-large-component of the-future of star-wars and lucasfilm is cgi-animation."
lucasfilm-animation used autodesk-software to animate both-the-film and the-series.
the-maya-3d-modeling-program was used to create the-highly-detailed-worlds, characters and creatures.
character-designer-kilian-plunkett referred to the-character-designs from genndy-tartakovsky's-original-2003-clone-wars-series, and animators reviewed designs from the-2d-series when creating the-animation-style.
tartakovsky was not involved with the-production, and criticized lucas's-decision to revisit the-era.
in 2007, rob-coleman divulged that one-episode was complete, with 15 more in production, and that rob-coleman was going to direct five of the-first-22-episodes.
rob-coleman revealed that the-reaction from licensees was very positive, and that the-final-assembly of shows was done at skywalker-ranch.
speaking at paleyfest on march 3, 2007, lucas revealed that the-series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on anakin-skywalker's-story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other-characters.
lucas revealed further-information in a-fan-interview, including a-new-character named ahsoka tano, over 100-episodes and a-possible-appearance by boba-fett.
the-first-trailer for the-series was released on the-official-star-wars-website on may 8, 2007.
in an-interview in the-september-24,-2007-issue of tv-guide, lucas confirmed that 39-episodes of the-series had been completed.
on april 8, 2007, ain't it cool-news reported that musician-eric-rigler had recorded music for the-series.
musician-eric-rigler disclosed that each-planet in the-star-wars-galaxy would have musician-eric-rigler own theme-music.
the-episode-musician eric-rigler performed on was based on bulgarian-music and played on uilleann-pipes.
kevin-kiner composed the-original-score for each-episode.
stuart-snyder, who oversaw cartoon-network and other-turner-broadcasting-system-cable-networks from 2007 to 2014, said  kevin-kiner became interested in the-new-clone-wars-series immediately upon starting the-job in may 2007.
snyder flew out to san-francisco, california to screen several-episodes, and told lucas the-only-place snyder wanted to see the-show was on cartoon-network.
snyder wished to create an-action/adventure-block of shows on friday-night in an-attempt to rejuvenate cartoon-network.
snyder expressed confidence that the-shows would help boost ratings: "you catch me at a-time where i have a-smile on my-face because of our-internal-results.
i can say there's a-little-bit of bragging on the-third-quarter for us. "
the-"young-padawans"-arc from season 5 was intended to be aired separately from the-clone-wars as a-feature-length-pilot for a-spin-off-series that never materialized.
seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some-form of production at the-time of the-show's-cancellation in march 2013, shortly after lucasfilm was purchased by disney.
release ==
an-online-comic released alongside the-series depicts story-snippets between episodes.
===-broadcast ===
the-clone-wars premiered on october 3, 2008 at 9-p.m. on cartoon-network.
the-clone-wars-cartoon-network is shown in a-16:9-(1.77:1)-aspect-ratio, cropped from the-clone-wars-original-aspect-ratio (oar) of 2.35:1 (as seen in the-uk-sky-premiere-screenings).
the-show began airing on their-adult-swim-block on march 14, 2009, making the-series the first cartoon network series to simultaneously air on both-cartoon-network and adult-swim.
the-series the-first-cartoon-network-series also aired from january 15 to march 26, 2009 on tnt, making the-series the-first-cartoon-network-series the-first-form of animation to air on that-channel in over-a-decade.
the-show entered an-off-network-syndication in 2012, and in the-fall of that-year trifecta-entertainment & media put  the-show into barter-syndication.
on weekends-trifecta-entertainment & media aired on many-affiliates on the-independent-stations as well as an-affiliates of fox-mynetworktv and the-cw (the-latter-network's-cw-plus-service also carries the-program as part of the-program national schedule).
the-show has been taken off the-air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low-costs and was not renewed for season 2 in the 2013-2014 tv season due to disney's-completed-acquisitions of lucasfilm-ltd in december 2012.
on march 11, 2013, it was announced that the-clone-wars would be "winding down" to focus on the-star-wars sequel trilogy and a new series, star-wars-rebels.
on february 13, 2014, netflix announced that starting on march 7, 2014 netflix would begin the-us-distribution of the-entire-tv-series, including some-previously-unreleased-director's-cuts, and the-previously-unaired-new-season dubbed "the lost missions".
the latter also became available for purchase on digital-video-stores, such as itunes, in mid-2014.
the-netflix-distribution of the-series, along with the-blu-rays, included versions of some-episodes with previously-censored-material deemed too inappropriate for the-demographic of cartoon-network.
one of the-most-well-known-edits was the-removal of the-character ventress kissing a-clone after the-character had stabbed him with the-character lightsaber.
the-show was removed from netflix on april 7, 2019.
for the revival and final-season, the-remaining-episodes of the-series are exclusively available on disney+.
the-first-episode for season 7 was released on february 21, 2020, with the-final-episode being released on may 4 of the-same-year.
home-media ===
warner-home-video distributed the-videodisc-releases of the-first-five-seasons, while walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment handled the-videodisc-release of the-sixth-season as star-wars:
the-clone-wars – the-lost-missions.
apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three-special-dvd-releases consisting of four-episodes from a-particular-season that reflected a-certain-story-arc or theme: a-galaxy divided, an-early-dvd-release of the-series which included the-four-season-1-episodes ("ambush", "shadow of malevolence", "destroy malevolence", "downfall of a-droid")
clone-commandos, another-dvd-compilation that includes episode five-"rookies" as well as episodes 19 through 21 ("storm over ryloth", "innocents of ryloth" and "liberty on ryloth").
darth-maul-returns, a-feature-length-"director's-cut" edited together from season-4-episodes "massacre", "bounty", "brothers" and "revenge" and was initially available exclusively at target.
reception == ===
critical-response ===
although it began with mixed-to-positive-reviews, the-series achieved critical-acclaim over time.
the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes reported that 67% of critics have given the-first-season a-positive-review based on 15-reviews, with an-average-rating of 5.73/10.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "with an-agreeably-entertaining-first-season, star-wars: the-clone-wars opens a-fun,-kid-friendly-chapter of the-franchise's-sprawling-mythology. "
100% of critics have given the-third-and-fifth-seasons a-positive-review based on 5-reviews each, with an-average-rating of 8/10 and 7.85/10 respectively.
100% of critics have given the-sixth-season a-positive-review based on 12-reviews, with an-average-rating of 8.92/10.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "sophisticated-storytelling-and-quality-animation make the-sixth-season of star-wars
: the-clone-wars a fitting end to the-series. "
100% of critics have given the-seventh-season a-positive-review based on 24-reviews, with an-average-rating of 8.43/10.
the-site's-critics-consensus reads, "
thanks to its-beautifully-animated-action-sequences and its-impressively-layered-storytelling, the-clone-wars'-final-chapter affirms its-place as one of star-wars'-greatest-entries.
on metacritic, the-first-season has a-weighted-average-score of 64 out of 100 based on 9-critic-reviews, indicating "generally-favorable-reviews".
on july 11, 2008, television-critics were shown a-completed-episode of the-new-series.
the-hollywood-reporter's-live-feed-blog called the-footage "likely the-most-photo-realistic-animated-tv-series ever produced."
on august 31, 2008, a-sneak-peek of the-new-series was shown on cartoon-network.
ign named cartoon-network the 89th best animated series.
they specifically praised the-episodes "rookies", "cloak of darkness", and "lair of grievous" saying that they storylines stood out as some of the best in the-star-wars expanded universe.
ratings ===
star-wars:
star-wars became the-most-watched-series-premiere in cartoon-network-history.
the-series averaged 3-million-total-viewers in the-series debut, according to nielsen-media-research.
cartoon-network said the-star-wars-spin-off ranked as the-number-one-channel among all-major-animated-networks in the-time-slot among total-viewers (the largest in the-demographic for any-premiere-telecast of an-original-cartoon-series).
on july 23, 2010, at the-san-diego-comic-con, craig-glenday, editor of the-guinness-world-records, presented star-wars: the-clone-wars-supervising-director-dave-filoni, cg-supervisor-joel-aron, and lead-designer-kilian-plunkett a-certificate proclaiming the-cartoon-series "the-highest-rated-sci-fi-animation currently on television".
tech-times said that, "while the-star-wars-prequel-films fail to make audiences care about characters like anakin-skywalker, the-clone-wars succeeds.
during may 2020, following the-release of the-seventh-season on disney+, the-clone-wars became the-most-streamed-digital-original-show in the-united-states.
accolades === ==
the-clone-wars-legacy ==
at the-time of cancellation in march 2013, 65-more-episodes were in development.
thirteen-of-65-more-episodes were finished to become part of season 6: the-lost-missions, but there were still additional-arcs that were never released.
in september 2014, starwars.com released details of three-story-arcs from the-unfinished-episodes.
literature === ====
darth-maul: son of dathomir ====
a-four-episode-arc continued the-story of darth-maul following the-events from the-season-5-episode "the-lawless", detailing his-escape from sidious; darth-maul regains control of the-criminal-shadow-collective, and battles dooku, grievous, and sidious.
a-four-episode-arc was adapted into a-four-part-limited-comic-book-series, darth-maul: son of dathomir, which debuted in may 2014.
dark-disciple ====
an-eight-episode-arc with nightsister-asajj-ventress and jedi-quinlan-vos was adapted into dark-disciple, a-novel by christie-golden released on july 7, 2015.
the-story follows vos partnering up with ventress, hoping to execute count-dooku.
story-reels ===
two-arcs consisting each of four-episodes were released on the-official-star-wars-website for free in the-form of complete-animatics, albeit with unfinished-animation as four-episodes only went through the-earliest-stages of production.
both were fully voiced by the-cast.
crystal-crisis on utapau ===
in september 2014, four-unfinished-episodes were released on the-official-star-wars-website.
the-arc took place on utapau with obi-wan and anakin investigating an-arms-deal involving the-separatists and a-kyber-crystal.
the-arc also dealt with anakin's-feelings after the-departure of ahsoka.
the-arc was also included in the-season 6 blu-ray.
the-bad-batch ====
the-unfinished-animatics for the-bad-batch, a-four-episode-arc, were screened at the-star-wars-celebration-convention in anaheim, california on april 17, 2015.
scripted by brent-friedman, it is a-four-part-story-arc focusing on a-ragtag-unit of clone-commandos of the-same-name.
a-four-part-story-arc focusing on a-ragtag-unit of clone-commandos of the-same-name was subsequently released on starwars.com for free shortly after on april 29, 2015.
the-completed-episodes were aired as the-first-part of the-seventh-season.
on july 13, 2020, a-spin-off-sequel-series titled star wars: the-bad-batch was announced; the-bad-batch will follow the-titular-group of clones working as mercenaries in the-immediate-aftermath of the-clone-war.
video-games ==
seven-video-games have been released, which are based on the-style-and-character-designs of the-series.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – lightsaber-duels, a-fighting-game released on november 11, 2008 for wii.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance, an-action-adventure-game released on november 11, 2008 for nintendo-ds.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars – jedi-alliance, an-action-adventure-game released on november 11, 2008 for nintendo-dsnintendo-ds.
clone-wars-adventures, an-online-pc-game launched on september 15, 2010 online by sony-online-entertainment and shut down on march 31, 2014.
lego-star-wars-iii:
the-clone-wars, released in march 2011 by tt-games for playstation 3, playstation portable, xbox 360, wii, nintendo ds, pc, mac, and nintendo 3ds, which further stylizes the-characters as part of the-lego-star-wars-theme and is mostly based on the-first-two-seasons.
star-wars:
the-clone-wars-pinball, a-virtual-pinball-adaptation of the-series'-original-run, released in 2013 as a-purchaseable-add-on for zen-studios'-star-wars-pinball-collection for most-seventh--and-eighth-generation-home-video-game-systems, computers and mobile-devices.
disney-infinity 3.0, released in september 2015 by disney-interactive for playstation 4, playstation 3, xbox-one, xbox 360, wii-u, microsoft-windows, ios and android, which stylizes select-major-characters from the-show as action-figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life nfc system.
each-copy of the-game comes with the-playset, "twilight of the-republic", which is an-alternate-storyline set during the-clone-wars-era, along with two-starting-characters, anakin and ahsoka.
other-characters from the-show also appear, although most of  other-characters from the-show are not playable or are fought as bosses.
characters and/or locations from the-show have also appeared in the-following-star-wars-games listed below:
star-wars: galactic-defense, a-now-defunct-tower-defense-game released on ios and android by dena, in which a-number of playable-champions include characters from the-show.
several-levels in the-main-campaign also take place on the-planet-felucia, a-major-clone-wars-hotspot featured in some-episodes.
star-wars: galaxy of heroes, a-turn-based-rpg also released on ios and android by electronic-arts, where some-levels take place on planets depicted in the-show (such as dathomir) and a-number of collectible,-playable-characters are from the-show (such as dathomir).
star-wars:
force-arena, an-online-moba-game released on ios and android by netmarble, where an-august-2017-update allowed players to recruit characters, vehicles and battle-units from the-series, as well as battle on planets like felucia.
star-wars-battlefront-ii, a-video-game available on microsoft-windows, playstation 4 and xbox-one, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like ryloth and kamino, where some-battles in the-series were fought.
wood, taylor, lanter and burton also reprise wood, taylor, lanter and burton voice roles for four-new-playable-heroes (general-grievous, obi-wan-kenobi, anakin-skywalker and count-dooku, respectively) being added to the-game's-third-season in late 2018, themed after the-clone-wars.
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at starwars.com
the-clone-wars-legacy at starwars.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at the-big-cartoon-database-star-wars:
the-clone-wars at imdb-‹the
tv.com-show is being considered for deletion.›
star-wars:
the-clone-wars at tv.com
the-star-wars-franchise has spawned multiple-films and television-series.
two-animated-series were released in the-mid-1980s.
further-animated-series began to be released in the-2000s, the first two of which focused on the-prequel-trilogy-era-clone-wars.
after disney's-acquisition of lucasfilm, only-the-clone-wars was kept in the-canon of continuity of the-episodic-star-wars-films.
two-additional-half-hour-animated-series were created: rebels, which ties into the-original-trilogy, and resistance, which ties into the-sequel-trilogy.
an-additional-series spun off from the-clone-wars, titled the-bad-batch, will debut on disney+
at-least-seven-original-star-wars-series will be released on disney+.
the-first-live-action-series in the-franchise, the-mandalorian, premiered in november 2019, and spawned three-spin-offs, the-book of boba-fett, rangers of the-new-republic and ahsoka.
additional-live-action-series include andor, obi-wan-kenobi, the-acolyte, and lando.
animated-series == ===
droids and ewoks (1985–1987) ===
nelvana, the-animation-studio that produced the-animated-segment of the-holiday-special, was hired to create two-animated-series which aired together on abc: droids (1985–1986) follows the-adventures of c-3po and r2-d2, and its-sister series-ewoks (1985–1987) features wicket and other-members of the-titular-species from return of the-jedi, both set before the-events of the-original-trilogy.
one-reviewer calls droids "rudimentary" and ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the-first-major-effort to expand the-star-wars-'brand' beyond the-star-wars-'brand' original live-action film existence."
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) ===
george-lucas created  george-lucas own animation-company, lucasfilm-animation, and used it to produce  george-lucas first in-house star wars cgi-animated series, using cartoon-network's-2003-clone-wars-micro-series as a-"pilot".
the-clone-wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a-2008-animated-film of the-same-name.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series is set between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith of the-prequel-trilogy.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series focuses mainly on the-jedi-characters of anakin-skywalker and obi-wan-kenobi, as well as anakin's-padawan-apprentice, ahsoka-tano (an-original-character created by filoni for his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series), with other-characters from the-live-action-films in supporting roles.
his first in-house star wars cgi-animated series marked the-beginning of dave-filoni's-involvement in star-wars-animation-projects.
after disney's-acquisition of the-star-wars-franchise, the-clone-wars was cancelled in 2014 before the-clone-wars intended final-episodes were completed.
its-intended-final-episodes were released on netflix as "the-lost-missions".
the-chronological-storyline-order was released after the-series had initially finished airing.
the-film and series were included in the-canon established in 2014.
the-film and series was later revived for an-additional-final-season that premiered on february 21, 2020, on the-streaming-service disney+.
rebels (2014–2018) ===
in 2014, disney-xd began airing star-wars-rebels, the-first-cgi-animated-series produced following the-disney-acquisition.
it follows a-band of rebels as a-band of rebels fight the-galactic-empire in the-years leading up to a-new-hope.
it closed some of the-arcs introduced in the-clone-wars.
due to the-film rogue-one being produced at the-same-time, the-film and the-series acknowledged each other.
the-series also included an-in-canon-version of grand-admiral-thrawn from the-legends
thrawn-trilogy.
resistance (2018–2020) ===
the-animated-series star-wars-resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the-animation-style towards anime-inspired-cel-shading-visuals, and focuses on a-young-resistance-pilot kazuda-xiono before and during the force awakens and the-last-jedi, leading up to the-rise of skywalker.
sequel trilogy-characters such as captain-phasma, general-hux, and kylo-ren appear.
the-second-and-final-season premiered on october 6, 2019.
the-bad-batch ===
set after the-events of the-clone-wars, the-bad-batch follows the-titular-squadron making the-bad-batch way through the-galaxy as mercenaries in the-early-days of the-empire.
the-series was announced in july 2020, to debut on disney+
on may 4, 2021.
dave-filoni, athena-portillo, brad-rau, and jennifer-corbett serve as executive-producers, with carrie-beck as co-executive-producer and josh-rimes as producer.
rau also serves as supervising-director with jennifer-corbett the-head-writer.
visions ===
announced on december 10, 2020, star-wars: visions is an-anime-anthology-series of ten-short-films by different-creators set in the star-wars universe.
it is scheduled for release on disney+
== micro-series ==
clone-wars (2003–2005) ===
after the-release of attack of the-clones, developed and drawn by genndy-tartakovsky.
cartoon-network produced and aired the-micro-series-clone-wars from 2003 to weeks before the-2005-release of revenge of the-sith, as the-series featured events set between those-films.
the-plot in the-series was intended as prequel to then-upcoming-feature-movie-episode-iii: revenge of the-sith and directly leads to the-starting-point in the-movie.
the-plot in the-series won the-primetime-emmy-awards for outstanding-animated-program in 2004 and 2005.
blips (2017) ===
star-wars-blips is an-animated-micro-series created to promote the-last-jedi.
star-wars-blips features droids such as
bb-8-and-r2-d2, in addition to porgs.
forces of destiny (2017–2018) ===
the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny debuted in 2017; the-animated-micro-series-star-wars-forces of destiny focuses on the-female-characters of the-franchise and is set in various-eras.
galaxy of adventures (2018–2020) ===
star-wars-galaxy of adventures debuted on the-"star-wars-kids"-youtube-channel and website in late 2018.
using stylized-animation, the-series of shorts reimagine key-scenes from the-saga, initially leading up the-release of episode-ix.
the-shorts feature audio from the-original-films (with narration by dante-basco) and are animated by titmouse, inc. ==
= roll out (2019–2020) ===
star-wars roll out debuted on the star-wars kids youtube channel and website in august 2019.
the-shorts depict the-main-characters from the-franchise as ball-shaped, similar to bb-8, and utilize a-kid-friendly-cutout-animation-style.
io9 calls the-design of the-series "adorable".
==-live-action-series == ===
the-mandalorian (2019–present) ===
in march 2018, jon-favreau was hired to write and produce a-live-action-star-wars-series for disney+.
a-live-action-star-wars-series for disney+ follows "a-lone-gunfighter in the-outer-reaches of the-galaxy far from the-authority of the-new-republic" a few years after the-events of return of the-jedi.
in august 2018, it was reported that the-series would cost about "$100 million for 10-episodes".
pedro-pascal stars as the-titular-character, and is joined by supporting actors-gina-carano, nick-nolte, giancarlo-esposito, emily-swallow, carl-weathers, omid-abtahi, and werner-herzog.
the-series premiered on november 12, 2019, with the-launch of disney+.
the-second-season premiered on october 30, 2020.
the-book of boba-fett ===
in november 2020, deadline-hollywood reported that a-miniseries focused on boba-fett could begin filming before the-end of the-year, before a-third-season of the-mandalorian went into production.
the-series, known as the-book of boba-fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of the-mandalorian-season three.
favreau and filoni executive-produce along with robert-rodriguez, with temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen reprising temuera-morrison and ming-na-wen roles as boba-fett and fennec-shand, respectively.
it will be released in december 2021.
the-series will follow rebel-spy-cassian-andor, five years before the-events of rogue one, during the-formative-years of the-rebellion.
in november 2018, a-prequel-series to the-2016-film rogue one centered on rebel-spy-cassian-andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a-"rousing-spy-thriller".
diego-luna will reprise his-role for a-prequel-series to the-2016-film rogue one centered on cassian-andor.
stephen-schiff was hired to serve as showrunner-and-executive-producer of the-series, which was developed by jared-bush, who wrote a-series-bible and a-draft of the-pilot-episode.
in april 2019, alan-tudyk was confirmed to be reprising alan-tudyk role of k-2so.
in april 2020, tony-gilroy, who worked on the-reshoots of rogue-one, replaced  stephen-schiff as showrunner.
gilroy was going to write and direct the-pilot, and direct-other-episodes as well.
it was also revealed in april 2020 that stellan-skarsgård, kyle-soller,
denise-gough had joined the-cast in undisclosed-roles, along with genevieve-o'reilly reprising genevieve-o'reilly role of mon-mothma.
in september 2020, it was announced that gilroy would step down from gilroy directing duties in light of the-covid-19-pandemic and would be replaced by toby-haynes, who is set to direct the-first-three-episodes.
filming began in late-november 2020 in london.
andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12-episodes.
obi-wan-kenobi ===
in august 2019, it was reported that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise ewan-mcgregor role from the-prequel-trilogy.
a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was initially thought to have been developing as a-standalone-film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the-performance of solo at the-box-office.
during the-2019-d23-expo, lucasfilm officially announced that a-streaming-series focused on obi-wan-kenobi was in development, with ewan-mcgregor in talks to reprise his-role from the-prequel trilogyewan-mcgregor ewan-mcgregor .
it will take place eight years after revenge of the-sith and prior to the-events of a-new-hope, thus exploring the-time during kenobi's-exile on tatooine.
in september 2019, deborah-chow and hossein-amini were announced as the-series'-director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive-producers alongside mcgregor.
in october 2019, mcgregor said the-series' would comprise six-episodes.
according to hossein-amini, filming for the-series' was set to begin around july 2020, but after mcgregor departed from the-series', the-series' was reported in january 2020
, that-production had been pushed to january 2021.
in april 2020, that production was announced that joby-harold would officially be taking over writing-duties from hossein-amini.
in august 2020, mcgregor told thewrap that it would be a-limited-series.
in september 2020, mcgregor said that the-series is now scheduled to begin filming in early-2021.on-disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that hayden-christensen would reprise hayden-christensen role as darth-vader, and that the-series would be titled obi-wan kenobi.
obi-wan-kenobi is scheduled to be released in 2022, and will consist of 6-episodes.
the-acolyte ===
in april 2020, variety reported that a-female-centric-live-action-star-wars-series is in development for disney+
with russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland serving as a-writer and showrunner.
in early-november, russian-doll-co-creator-leslye-headland expounded that the-series would be set "in a-pocket of the-universe and a-pocket of the-timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the-geography of the-universe than its-existing-visuals.
on november 5, deadline reported that the-series was expected to be an-"action-thriller with martial-arts-elements".
on disney-investor-day 2020, the-series was revealed that the-series would take place during the-late-high-republic-era.
in december 2020, ahsoka was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, ahsoka exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and rangers of the-new-republic through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
rosario-dawson headlines the-series, reprising rosario-dawson role as ahsoka-tano.
it will be a-limited-series set sometime after rebels.
in december 2020, lando was announced as a-disney+-limited-series, focusing on the-titular-character, with a-story by justin-simien.
rangers of the-new-republic ===
in december 2020, rangers of the-new-republic was announced.
developed by favreau and filoni, it exists alongside the-mandalorian, the-book of boba-fett and ahsoka through interconnected-stories culminating in a-"climactic-story-event".
game-show == ===
jedi-temple-challenge (2020) ===
star-wars:
jedi-temple-challenge (2020) === is a-web-based-children's-game-show developed by lucasfilm.
first announced in december 2019, the-series debuted on the-star-wars-kids-website and youtube-channel on june 10, 2020.
the-series features young-contestants competing as jedi-padawans in a-series of obstacle-courses and knowledge-tests in the-attempt to gain the-rank of jedi-knight.
the-show is hosted by ahmed-best, who plays the-character of kelleran-beq, the-jedi-master-mentor of the-contestants who is joined by his-droid-companions, ad-3
(voiced by mary-holland and performed by gordon-tarpley) and lx-r5.
sam-witwer provides the-voice of an-unknown-character of the-dark-side of the-force during the-final-challenge of each-episode.
reception == ===
ratings === ===
critical-response === ===
emmy-awards ===
abandoned-projects == ===
underworld ==
in 2005, plans for a-live-action-television-series set between the-prequel and original-trilogies were announced at star-wars-celebration.
in 2007, lucas described the-project as "one-show that will split into four-shows, focusing on different-characters. "
the-project entered development in early 2009.
the-series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as han-solo, chewbacca, lando-calrissian, boba-fett, c-3po, and emperor-palpatine.
lucas described the-series as "more talky.
it's more of what i would call a soap opera with a-bunch of personal-dramas in it.
it's not really based on action-adventure-films from the-'30s—
it's actually more based on film-noir-movies from the-'40s!"
producer-rick-mccallum revealed the-working-title, star-wars: underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal-and-political-power-struggles in the-"period when the-empire is trying to take things over. "
over one-hundred-42-minute-episodes were planned, with 50-scripts written.
these were mostly second-drafts, but due to  these-complex-content, were too expensive to produce.
ronald-d.-moore was one of the-writers, and extensive-artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at skywalker-ranch under the-close-supervision of lucas and mccallum.
the-project was still being considered after lucasfilm was sold to disney, including by abc, with stories being reviewed as of december 2015.
according to kathleen-kennedy, that's an-area we've spent a-lot of time, reading through the-material that kathleen-kennedy developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
so our-attitude is, our don't want to throw any of that-stuff away.
it's gold.
and it's something we're spending a-lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those-things further.
our definitely want to.
the-plot of the-anthology-film rogue-one: a-star-wars-story was originally pitched as an-episode of the-series.
the-story of han winning the-millennium-falcon from lando was planned to be featured and later developed as solo:
a-star-wars-story.
in early 2020, stargate-studios shared test-footage made to promote the-series to networks, as well as a-google-doc listing production-details for the-series.
detours ===
star-wars-detours is an-unaired-animated-parody-series from the-creators of robot-chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
production began in 2012 prior to the-disney-acquisition, with 39-episodes completed and 62-additional-scripts finished.
cara-dune-centered-series ===
a-mandalorian-spin-off-series centered on the-character cara-dune was reportedly considered for disney+ by november 2020, which lucasfilm had intended to announce at disney's-investor-day-event the next month.
however, after gina-carano, who portrayed dune in the-mandalorian, posted a-series of controversial-social-media-posts in both-november 2020 and february 2021, any-such-project was cancelled and disney severed disney ties with the-actress.
see also ==
lego-star-wars-§-films and videos-list of star-wars cast members-list of star-wars characters
list of star-wars-films ==
notes == ==
references ==
external-links ==
official-website
the-star-wars-series has spawned multiple-live-action-and-animated-films.
the-star-wars-series started with a-film-trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the-middle of the-story—which was later expanded to a-trilogy of trilogies, better known as the-"skywalker-saga".
the-original-trilogy was released between 1977 and 1983, the-prequel-trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a-sequel-trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
the-original-eponymous-film, later-subtitled-episode-iv – a-new-hope, was followed by the-sequels episode-v –
the-empire strikes back (1980) and episode-vi – return of the-jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as the-original-trilogy.
years later, a-prequel-trilogy was released, consisting of episode-i – the-phantom-menace (1999), episode-ii – attack of the-clones (2002), and episode-iii – revenge of the-sith (2005).
after lucasfilm was sold to disney, a-sequel-trilogy began with episode-vii – the-force awakens (2015), continued with episode-viii –
the-last-jedi (2017), and concluded with episode-ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
in between the-sequel-films, two-anthology-films were released, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016) and solo:
a-star-wars-story (2018), both set between the-prequel and original-trilogies.
the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-sequel-films equates to over us$10 billion, and the-combined-box-office-revenue of the-films is currently the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise.
all-the-major-theatrical-live-action-films were nominated for academy-awards.
the-original-film was nominated for most of the-major-categories, including best-picture, best-director, best-original-screenplay, and best-supporting-actor for alec-guinness, while all-sequels have been nominated for technical-categories.
the-original-film was the-star-wars-holiday-special (1978).
in 1984 and 1985, two-live-action-films featuring the-ewoks were televised in the-united-states and released theatrically in europe.
several-star-wars-television-series have also been released.
skywalker-saga ==
the-main-star-wars-film-series is a-trilogy of trilogies; as the-main-star-wars-film-series neared completion, the-main-star-wars-film-series began to be referred to as the-"skywalker-saga".
the-main-star-wars-film-series was released beginning with the-original-trilogy (episodes-iv, v and vi, 1977–1983), followed by the-prequel-trilogy (episodes i, ii and iii, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (episodes vii, viii and ix, 2015–2019).
the-first-film released, star-wars (1977), is the-fourth-film chronologically and was later subtitled episode-iv – a-new-hope.
the-"skywalker-saga" begins with star-wars:
i – the-phantom-menace (1999) and concludes with episode ix – the-rise of skywalker (2019).
the-story follows each-generation of the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family and the-force-sensitive-skywalker-family struggle against the-evil-sith-lord-palpatine (darth-sidious).
the-prequel trilogy focuses on anakin-skywalker, his-training as a-jedi, and eventual-fall to the-dark-side as darth-vader.
the-prequel-trilogy follows his-children, luke and leia, as his-children, luke and leia join the-rebel-alliance and battle-vader, palpatine and his-galactic-empire.
the-sequel-trilogy features ben-solo-a.k.a-kylo-ren—the-son of leia and han-solo, nephew of luke, and grandson of anakin—who seeks to rule the-galaxy with rey, the-granddaughter of palpatine and the-last-jedi-apprentice of luke and leia.
each-episodic-film begins with an-opening-crawl, accompanied by the-main-star-wars-theme by john-williams, who composes the-scores for each-film.
the-first-six-films—most-notably-the-original-trilogy—have had retroactive-changes made after the-first-six-films—most-notably-the-original-trilogy— initial-theatrical-releases.
standalone-films ==
as lucas was outlining a-trilogy of trilogies, lucas also imagined making additional-movies unrelated to the-skywalker-saga.
the-first-theatrical-films set outside the-main-episodic-series were the-ewok-spin-off-films caravan of courage: an-ewok-adventure (1984) and ewoks:
the-battle for endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
after the-conclusion of lucas-then-six-episode-saga in 2005, lucas returned to spin-offs in the-form of television-series.
an-animated-film, the-clone-wars (2008), was released as a-pilot to a-tv-series of the-same-name.
an-anthology-series set between the-main-episodes entered development in parallel to the-production of the-sequel-trilogy, described by disney-cfo-jay-rasulo as origin-stories.
the-first-entry, rogue one: a-star-wars-story (2016), tells the-story of the-rebels who steal the-death-star plans directly before episode-iv.
a-star-wars-story (2018) focuses on han's-backstory, also featuring chewbacca and lando-calrissian.
animated-film === ====
the-clone-wars (2008) ====
preceding the-airing of the-animated-tv-series in late 2008, the-theatrical-feature star-wars: the-clone-wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an-afterthought. "
it reveals that anakin trained an-apprentice between attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith; the-series explains padawan-ahsoka-tano's-absence from the-latter-film.
the-character was originally criticized by fans, but by the-end of the-series
the-character had become a fan favorite.
the-film and series exist in the-same-level of canon as the-episodic-and-anthology-films.
anthology-films ===
before selling lucasfilm to disney in 2012, and parallel to his-development of a-sequel-trilogy, george-lucas and original-trilogy-co-screenwriter-lawrence-kasdan started development on a-standalone-film about a-young-han-solo.
in february 2013, disney-ceo-bob-iger made public the-development of a original trilogy co-screenwriter lawrence-kasdan film and entertainment-weekly reported that disney would focus on a-young-han-solo.
disney-cfo-jay-rasulo has described the-standalone-films as origin-stories.
kathleen-kennedy confirmed that there was "no-attempt being made to carry characters (from the-standalone-films) in and out of the-saga-episodes. "
the-standalone-films released so far are subtitled "a star wars story".
rogue one:
a-star-wars-story (2016) ====
rogue one is set directly before episode iv: a-new-hope and focuses on the-eponymous-group of rebels who obtain the-plans to the-death-star.
its-laser was developed by scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) after the-empire forcibly abducted scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen), separating scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) from scientist-galen-erso (played by mads-mikkelsen) daughter-jyn.
galen secretly sends a-defecting-imperial-pilot, bodhi-rook, to deliver a message warning of the-weapon's-existence and revealing the-weapon's-existence weakness to galen rebel friend saw-gerrera.
under the-false-promise of her-father's-liberation, jyn agrees to help rebel-alliance-intelligence-officer cassian-andor and jyn
droid-k-2so retrieve the-message from saw, now the-paranoid-leader of an-extremist-cell of rebels.
the-idea for the-movie came from john-knoll, the-chief-creative-officer of industrial-light & magic.
in may 2014, lucasfilm announced gareth-edwards as the-director of an-anthology-film, with gary-whitta writing the-first-draft for a-release on december 16, 2016.
the-film's-title was revealed to be rogue one, with chris-weitz rewriting the-script, and
felicity-jones in the-starring-role.
ben-mendelsohn and diego-luna also play new-characters, with james-earl-jones returning to voice-darth-vader.
edwards stated, "it comes down to a-group of individuals who don't have magical-powers that have to somehow bring hope to the-galaxy."
the-film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated-star-wars-tv-series, namely-the-clone-wars'-saw-gerrera, portrayed by forest-whitaker in  the-film.
the-film received generally-positive-reviews, with  the-film performances, action-sequences, soundtrack, visual-effects and darker-tone being praised.
the-film grossed over us$500 million worldwide within a-week of  the-film release.
a-star-wars-story (2018) ===
solo, the-second-anthology-film, focuses on han solo about 10 years before a-new-hope.
after an-escape-attempt from his-imperial-occupied-home-planet of corellia goes wrong, a-young-han vows to return to rescue a-young-han girlfriend qi'ra.
han-"solo" joins the-imperial-academy; however, han-"solo" is expelled for han-"solo" reckless behavior.
han-and-han-"solo"-newfound-wookiee-friend chewbacca-resort to a-criminal-life, mentored by veteran-smuggler-beckett.
after angering gangster-dryden-vos,-han-and-han-company's-lives depend on pulling a-heist for han.
without a-ship to travel, gangster-dryden-vos, han and his-company's-lives hire lando-calrissian, the-captain and owner of the-millennium-falcon.
before selling lucasfilm to disney, george-lucas had hired star-wars-original-trilogy-veteran-lawrence-kasdan to write a-film about a-young-han-solo.
a-film about a-young-han-solo-stars-alden-ehrenreich as a-young-han-solo, joonas-suotamo as chewbacca (after serving as a-double for the-character in the force awakens and the-last-jedi), donald-glover as lando-calrissian, emilia-clarke as qi'ra, and woody-harrelson as beckett.
lucasfilm originally hired phil-lord and christopher-miller to direct, but phil-lord and christopher-miller were fired during principal-photography, and replaced by ron-howard.
a-twist-ending acknowledges one of the-major-story-arcs of the-clone-wars-and-rebels-animated-series, while leaving the-story open ended for sequels.
rogue-squadron (2023) ====
during disney-investor-day 2020,  rogue-squadron (2023) ==== was announced that patty-jenkins would direct a-film titled rogue-squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023.
a-film titled rogue squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023 will be the-first-film in the-franchise directed by a-woman, and according to starwars.com, "will introduce a-new-generation of starfighter-pilots as they earn they wings and risk
they lives in a-boundary-pushing,-high-speed-thrill-ride, and move the-saga into the-future-era of the-galaxy."
according to patty-jenkins, a-film titled rogue squadron, set to be released on december 22, 2023 will be "something original with great-influence from the-games and the-books.
there's a-lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the-greatness of all of those-things, but yes, it's an-original-story
and i'm so psyched to do it.
when asked who was writing the-script for rogue-squadron, patty-jenkins said, "i want him to have him own proper-announcement, so i'm going to wait until that comes out."
unspecified-future-films ==
rian-johnson, the-writer/director of the-last-jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the-first-film of a-new-trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
though the-project is still active as of february 2021, no-release-date has been set due to johnson's-involvement with other-projects.
a-new-trilogy will differ from the-skywalker-focused-films in favor of focusing on new-characters and possibly-a-different-era than the-main-film-franchise.
the-status of
a-new-trilogy-johnson remains uncertain.
in mid-2018, lucasfilm confirmed that multiple-anthology-films were in development, with multiple-anthology-films release following a-hiatus after 2019's-the-rise of skywalker.
in addition to rogue-squadron (2023), two-untitled-films are scheduled for mid-december 2025, and 2027.on may 7, 2019, disney released disney 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that star-wars-films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.on-september 25, 2019
, disney was announced that marvel-cinematic-universe-producer-kevin-feige was developing a-star-wars-film with kathleen-kennedy, with michael-waldron set to write the-screenplay.
on february 21, 2020, variety reported that a-star-wars-film from sleight-director-j.-d.-dillard and luke-cage-writer-matt-owens was in the-early-stages of development.
on may 4, a-star-wars-film from sleight-director-j.-d.-dillard and luke-cage-writer-matt-owens was in the-early-stages of development was officially announced that taika-waititi (who directed the-first-season-finale of the-mandalorian) will direct a-star-wars-film from a-screenplay taika-waititi (who directed the-first-season-finale of the-mandalorian) is co-writing with krysty-wilson-cairns.
produced for television ==
the-first-spin-off-film (also-the-first-sequel to be released) was a-holiday-tv-special aired in 1978.
two-live-action-tv-films created in the-mid-1980s feature the-ewoks.
star-wars-holiday-special (1978) ===
produced for cbs in 1978, the-star-wars-holiday-special was a-two-hour-television-special, in the-format of a-variety-show.
stars of the-original-film-and-archive-footage from the-original-star-wars-film appeared alongside celebrity-guest-stars in plot-related-skits, musical-numbers, and an-animated-segment, all loosely tied together by the-premise of chewbacca's-family waiting for his-arrival for the-"life-day"-celebration on his-home-planet, kashyyyk.
the-special was aired only once and had a-widely-negative-reception.
the-11-minute-animated-sequence, which features the-debut of bounty-hunter-boba-fett, was positively received.
ewok-films ===
the-ewoks from return of the-jedi were featured in two-spin-off-television-films, the-ewok-adventure and ewoks:
the-battle for endor.
both aired on abc on the-thanksgiving-weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a-limited-international-theatrical-release.
warwick-davis reprised warwick-davis debut role as the-main-ewok,-wicket, in both.
both are set between the-events of the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi.
both were released on vhs, laser-disc, and on a-double-feature-dvd.
although based on story-ideas from lucas,   do not bear star-wars in   titles, and were considered to exist in a-lower-level of canon than the-episodic-films.
following disney's-acquisition of the-franchise,   were excluded from canon.
the-battle for endor would be the-last-live-action-star-wars-television-project produced by lucasfilm until 2019's-the-mandalorian.
the-ewok-adventure (1984) ====
in a-story by lucas and a-screenplay by bob-carrau, the-towani-family-spaceship-shipwrecks on the-forest-moon of endor.
while trying to repair
in a-story by lucas and a-screenplay by bob-carrau, the-towani-family-spaceship-shipwrecks on the-forest-moon of endor-ship, the-castaway-family is split, when a-giant-creature known as the-gorax kidnaps the-parents.
taking pity on the-kids, a-group of native-ewoks led by wicket decides to help little-cindel-towani and cindel-towani older-brother-mace, rescue little-cindel-towani and her older-brother-mace parents.
among other-stylistic-choices making the-film unique from the-star-wars-episodes is the-inclusion of a-narrator.
ewoks: the-battle for endor (1985) ====
the-sequel focuses on the-ewoks protecting their-village from marauders led by the-evil-lord-terak, who killed all-the-members of the-towani-family except for cindel, in search of a-power-battery.
a-droid-story ===
in december 2020, a-droid-story, an-animated-adventure-film for disney+ was announced.
according to the-official-star-wars-twitter, the-"epic-journey will introduce us to a-new-hero guided by r2-d2 and c-3po. "
reception == ===
box-office-performance ===
the-star-wars-films are the-second-highest-grossing-film-franchise of all-time worldwide, behind the-marvel-cinematic-universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the-global-box-office.
critical-response === ===
accolades === ====
academy-awards ====
the-eleven-live-action-films together have been nominated for 37-academy-awards, of which the-eleven-live-action-films together have won seven.
the-eleven-live-action-films together were also awarded a-total of three-special-achievement-awards.
the-empire strikes back and return of the-jedi
received special-achievement-awards for  the-empire-visual-effects, and star-wars received a-special-achievement-award for star-wars alien, creature and robot voices.
grammy-awards ====
grammy-awards ==== has received a-total of fifteen grammy-award-nominations, winning six.
notes-====-library of congress ===
in 1989, the-library of congress selected the-original-star-wars-film for preservation in the-u.s.-national-film-registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
the empire strikes back was selected in 2010.
35mm-reels of the-1997-special-editions were the-versions initially presented for preservation because of the-difficulty of transferring from the-original-prints, but it was later revealed that the-library of congress possessed a-copyright-deposit-print of the-original-theatrical-releases.
by 2015, star-wars had been transferred to a-2k-scan which can be viewed by appointment.
emmy-awards ====
caravan of courage:
an-ewok-adventure was one of four-films to be juried-awarded emmys for outstanding-special-visual-effects at the-37th-primetime-emmy-awards.
the-film was additionally nominated for outstanding-children's-program but lost in this-category to an-episode of american-playhouse.
at the-38th-primetime-emmy-awards, ewoks: the-battle for endor and the-cbs-documentary-dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded emmys for outstanding-special-visual-effects.
the-film additionally received two-nominations for outstanding-children's-program and outstanding sound mixing for a-miniseries or a-special.
unproduced-and-rumored-films ==
in early 2013, bob-iger announced the-development of a-spin-off-film written by simon-kinberg, reported by entertainment-weekly to focus on bounty-hunter-boba-fett during the-original-trilogy.
in mid-2014, josh-trank was officially announced as the-director of an-undisclosed-spin-off-film, but had left the-project a year later due to creative-differences, causing a-teaser for an-undisclosed-spin-off-film to be scrapped from star-wars-celebration.
in may 2018, it was reported that james-mangold had signed on to write and direct a-fett-film, with kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
by october, an-undisclosed-spin-off-film was reportedly no longer in production, with the-studio instead focusing on the-mandalorian, which utilizes a-similar-character-design.
in august 2017, it was rumored that films focused on jabba the-hutt, and jedi-masters-obi-wan and yoda were being considered or were in development.
stephen-daldry was reportedly in early-negotiations to co-write and direct the-obi-wan-movie.
at d23-expo in august 2019, it was announced that a-streaming-series about the-character would be produced instead.
felicity-jones, who played jyn-erso in rogue-one, has the-option of another-star-wars-film in her-contract; notwithstanding her-character's-fate in rogue-one, it has been speculated that her could return in other-anthology-films.
in 2018, critics noted that solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
alden-ehrenreich and emilia-clarke confirmed that  alden-ehrenreich and emilia-clarke contracts to play han-solo and q'ira extended for additional-films, if required.
an-unannounced-film centered around the-mos-eisley-spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the-cancellation or postponement of the-anthology-series.
lucasfilm swiftly denied the-rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple-unannounced-films were in development.
game of thrones-creators david benioff and d.-b.-weiss were to write and produce a-trilogy of star-wars-films scheduled to be released in december 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in february 2018.
however, citing game of thrones-creators david-benioff and d.-b.-weiss commitment to a-netflix-deal, the-duo stepped away from the-project in october 2019.
kennedy stated  kennedy openness to their-returning when their-schedules allow.
additionally, though unconfirmed by lucasfilm, buzzfeed reported in may 2019 that laeta-kalogridis was writing the-script for the-first-film in a-potential-knights of the-old-republic-trilogy.
in january 2020, a-film set in the-era of the-high-republic was rumored to be in development.
see also ==
list of star-wars cast members
list of star wars characters list of star-wars-television-series ===
parodies ===
hardware-wars
spaceballs-thumb-wars
robot-chicken-star-wars laugh robot-chicken-star-wars up
,-fuzzball:
the-family-guy-trilogy-ice-pirates ==
footnotes ==
references ==
citations ===
sources ===
external-links ==
official-website-clone-troopers are fictional-characters in the-star-wars-franchise created by george-lucas.
official-website-clone-troopers have been featured in a-number of star-wars-media, including episode ii:
attack of the-clones (2002), episode iii: revenge of the-sith (2005),
the-clone-wars-animated-film (2008), the-related-television-series of the-same-name (2008–2020), and the-rebels-television-series (2014–2018), as well as comics, novels, and video-games of the-star-wars-legends expanded universe.
in-universe, the-clone-troopers serve as the-military of the-galactic-republic, created in the-wake of the confederacy of independent-systems' formation, which threatened the-galactic-peace established by the-galactic-republic.
the-three-year-conflict between the-clones and the-separatists'-battle-droid-armies is known as the-"clone-wars", in reference to the former, and was secretly orchestrated by the-galactic-republic's-chancellor-palpatine to seize power and transform the-galactic-republic into the-galactic-empire.
all-clone-troopers are humans, bred from the-dna of all-clone-troopers are humans, bred from the-dna of their-genetic-template, the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, run by the native kaminoans, who genetically modified the-clones to display unquestioned-obedience to the-higher-chain of command, and age at twice the-rate of a-normal-human-genetic-template, the-bounty-hunter-jango-fett, at the-cloning-facilities on kamino, run by the native kaminoans, who genetically modified the-clones to display unquestioned-obedience to the-higher-chain of command, and age at twice the-rate of a-normal-human.
during the-clone-wars, they served under the-command of the-jedi-order, but ultimately turned on they and killed they, as a-result of palpatine issuing order 66, which branded the-jedi as traitors and ordered they deaths.
the-nature of order 66 is explored in more-detail in the-clone-wars-animated-series, which reveals that palpatine had secretly arranged for the-clone-army's-creation almost a decade before the-clone-wars, and ordered that all-clones be outfitted with inhibitor-chips, which would alter all-clones mentality and force all-clones to carry out order 66 unquestionably.
following the-formation of the-empire, clone-troopers became more and more uncommon as clone-troopers were slowly replaced by stormtroopers.
at the-time of the-original-star-wars-trilogy, the-501st-legion,-aka-"vader's-fist", was the-only-known-branch of the-imperial-army to consist mostly of former-clone-troopers.
during development of the empire strikes back, lucas initially conceived a-planet of clones, which is why the-clone-wars was mentioned for the-first-time in the-original-star-wars (1977)-film.
the-clone-trooper-armor was designed to suggest an-evolution into the-stormtroopers of the-original-trilogy, and  the-clone-trooper-armor incorporated features from both-the-armor of stormtroopers and boba-fett, revealed in attack of the-clones to be an-unaltered-clone of jango.
the-armored-troopers in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith are computer-generated-images voiced by temuera-morrison, who played jango.
younger-clones were played by bodie-taylor and daniel-logan, who played the-younger-boba.
unhelmeted-clones were played by both-morrison and taylor, who wore bodysuits to isolate their-heads, and some-clone-troopers featured a-blend of the-actors'-features.
in the-animated-the-clone-wars-film-and-television-series, adult-clone-troopers are voiced by dee-bradley-baker and child-clone-troopers are voiced by logan.
while the-prequel trilogy depicted clone-troopers as soldiers lacking any-personality, the-clone-wars-animated-film-and-television-series introduced numerous-clones with distinctive-traits, who quickly became fan-favorites.
clone-troopers were humanized especially by the-television-series, which explored clone-troopers motivations and feelings about the-clone-wars.
since then, numerous-star-wars works set during the-clone-wars-era have featured clone-troopers as main-characters.
clone-troopers have become cultural-icons, and a-widely-recognized-element of the-star-wars-franchise.
concept and creation == === development and design ==
in writing the empire strikes back, leigh-brackett's-first-draft of the-film initially developed lando-calrissian as a-clone from a-planet of clones involved in the-clone-wars mentioned in a-new-hope and were nearly made extinct by the-war, but this-concept was not featured in the-film.
george-lucas later came up with this-concept.
lucas intended for the-prequel-trilogy to depict the-evolution of the-galaxy's-fighting-forces, and the-clone-troopers were the-step after flawed-battle-droids.
clone-troopers were designed to strongly suggest the-army's-evolution into the-empire's-stormtrooper-army.
concept-artist-jay-shuster said of the-armor-design, "the-armor-design follows the-formula for a-lot of the-prequel-trilogy.
take something pre-conceived in the-prequel-trilogy and de-generate it."
design-director-doug-chiang incorporated both-features of the-boba-fett and stormtrooper-armor into the-armor-design, acknowledging the-"vague-assertion in star-wars-lore" that fett's-armor was connected to those of the-stormtroopers.
initial-concept-models implied that the-first-generation-armor was thicker and bulkier than stormtrooper-armor, and this-characteristic was retained by the-art-department for revenge of the-sith.
lucas expressed a-desire for individualized-trooper-armor from the-beginning of art-development for revenge of the-sith.
several-variations were largely dictated by environmental-needs, but others were influenced of the-2003-clone-wars-animated-series and the-desert-stormtroopers of a-new-hope.
the clone trooper designs "progressed" closer toward the-stormtrooper-designs, and the-film included variant-designs similar to the-sandtrooper, scout-trooper, and snowtrooper-armor of the-original-trilogy.
the-designs of clone-trooper in snow and cold-weather-gear, seen in season one of the-clone-wars, are heavily inspired by early-concept and costume by ralph-mcquarrie, joe-johnston, and john-mollo for the empire strikes back.
portrayal ===
in attack of the-clones and revenge of the-sith, all-clone-troopers are computer-generated-images and are voiced by temuera-morrison, who played the-clone-template jango-fett.
all-clone-troopers were played by daniel-logan, who also played jango's-clone-son boba-fett, and the-clone-troopers as young-men were played by taylor.
taylor was filmed multiple times and composited to fill out crowded-shots set in tipoca-city, and in some-cases, such as for distant-shots, his was entirely digital.
commander-cody, seen in armor without his-helmet in revenge of the-sith, was played by morrison.
his wore a-blue-bodysuit and only-footage of his-head was used for cody; his held a-stormtrooper-helmet to approximate the digital clone trooper helmet cody carries.
like morrison, taylor also played armored-and-unhelmeted-clones in revenge of the-sith, wearing a-blue-bodysuit that isolated his-head.
some-clone-troopers were entirely digital and featured a-digital-blend of morrison's-and-taylor's-facial-features.
some-clone-troopers was match-animated to the-actors'-bodies.
the-clone-troopers are voiced by dee-bradley-baker in the-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars and the-clone-wars related animated-television-series of the-same-name.
dee-bradley-baker attempted to give each-clone-trooper a-unique-voice, taking into account-personality, age, and position within the-unit, sometimes describing the-clone in a-single-adjective and focusing on that-descriptor for the-voice-work.
each-clone was voiced individually, with all-the-clone's-lines for the-episode recorded at one-time before moving to another-character, and the-dialogue was edited together.
logan voiced  the-clone-troopers in seasons two and three of the-2008-television-series.
dee-bradley-baker reprises dee-bradley-baker role in the-2014-rebels-animated-series.
appearances == ===
in attack of the-clones (2002), jedi-master-obi-wan-kenobi discovers the-clone-army on kamino.
he is told by the-kaminoans that jedi-master-sifo-dyas ordered the-army on the-republic's-behalf ten years prior; however, sifo-dyas'-apparent-death shortly before that-timeframe leads the-jedi-order to doubt this.
the-clone-troopers are cloned from jango-fett, a-bounty-hunter hired by a-man named tyranus, later revealed to be sith-lord-count-dooku.
the-clone-troopers-genetics are altered so that the-clone-troopers age at-twice-the-normal-rate and are more loyal and easier to command.
the-army is deployed to geonosis under the-command of the-jedi to rescue obi-wan, anakin-skywalker, and padmé-amidala from execution by the-separatists.
the-ensuing-battle becomes the first one in the-clone-wars.
although the-clone-army emerges victorious, dooku and many-other-separtists-leaders escape, meaning that the-war has only just begun.
in revenge of the-sith (2005), set three years later, the-clone-army continues to fight in the-clone-wars against the-separatist-battle-droid-army.
however, just as it appears that the-republic will win the-war, chancellor-palpatine, secretly-the-sith-lord-darth-sidious, orders the-clone-army to execute order 66, turning the-clone-army against the-jedi.
the-clone-troopers kill the-clone-troopers the-jedi-commanders, although a few manage to escape, while the-501st-legion, led by the-newly-christened-darth-vader, storms the-jedi-temple, burning the-jedi-temple and killing the-jedi inside, which effectively ends the-jedi order.
following vader's-assassination of the-remaining-separatist-leaders, palpatine transforms the-republic into the-galactic-empire and the-clone-army becomes the-basis of the-clone-army.
clone-troopers are referenced in the force awakens (2015) when kylo-ren chides general-hux for the-betrayal of rogue-stormtrooper-fn-2187 and suggests that supreme-leader-snoke should consider a-clone-army.
animation === ====
the-clone-wars ====
clone-troopers are heavily featured in the-2008-animated-film the-clone-wars, which spawned an-animated-series of the-same-name that lasted until 2014, with a-final-season released in 2020.
many named clone troopers are introduced and given individual-personalities, serving as the-focus of several-story-arcs.
in the-6th-season, more of the-nature of "order 66" is revealed when a-clone-trooper named fives discovers that a-clone-trooper named fives and a-clone-trooper named fives brothers have chips implanted into he and his-brothers-brains that would compel he and his-brothers to kill jedi when "order 66" is uttered.
ultimately, jedi-jedi remained unaware of this as fives was executed by a-shock-trooper-clone ordered by palpatine to conceal the-existence of the-contingency-order.
rebels ====
the-2014-animated-tv-show
star-wars-rebels features a-group of former-clone-troopers who had removed star-wars-rebels chips and, therefore, were not forced to carry out order 66.
these-clones help the-crew of the-ghost in these-clones fight against the-empire, and eventually join the-rebel-alliance.
it is also revealed that in the-years after the-end of the-clone-wars, the-empire gradually replaced the-aging-clones with the-less-effective-but-more-numerous-stormtroopers.
in other-media ===
in the-novels lords of the-sith by paul-s.-kemp, and tarkin by james-luceno, several-clone-troopers are still in active-service during the-early-years of the-empire's-reign, such as among stormtroopers serving darth-vader, and even among the-emperor's-elite-imperial-guard.
in the-legends-game star-wars-battlefront-ii, several-clone-troopers were fitted with new-armour and weapons, and became the-imperial-stormtrooper-corps of the-empire.
later, a-combination of natural-born-humans as well as clones from different-donor-templates would be incorporated into the-imperial-stormtrooper-corps of the-empire.
individual-clone-troopers == ===
coruscant-guard ===
the-coruscant-guard is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic tasked with internal-security-and-peacekeeping-operations on coruscant, protecting "soft-target" public-spaces and important-"hard-target"-buildings, and serving as escorts and guards on diplomatic-missions.
they first appear in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, where they search for yoda's-body in the-senate-building after commander-fox-duel with darth-sidious and later help darth-sidious recover darth-vader's-body on mustafar.
the-coruscant-guard appears in the-clone-wars-film-and-television-series, led by commander-fox.
the-coruscant-guard
hunt-jedi-fugitive ahsoka-tano
when jedi-fugitive-ahsoka-tano is framed for the-bombing of the-jedi-temple and for murder in season five, and  the-coruscant-guard-search for arc-trooper-fives when commander-fox is framed for an-assassination-attempt on supreme-chancellor-palpatine in season six.
in season seven, a-skirmish broke out onboard former-jedi-padawan-ahsoka-tano's-venator-class-star-destroyer during the-final-days of the-clone-wars when clone-troopers of the-332nd-company and coruscant-guard received order 66 from supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine.
members of the-coruscant-guard wear armor with red-markings.
commander-fox ====
commander-fox, cc-1010, led the-coruscant-guard, an-elite-clone-trooper-unit assigned to serve as peace-keepers on the-galactic-republic-capital.
following the-battle on teth, fox's-squad rescued senator-padmé-amidala from ziro the-hutt.
fox stormed ziro's-palace, took out  fox battle droids, and freed amidala.
ziro was taken to the-republic-judiciary-central-detention-center.
when cad-bane entered the-senate-building and held a-number of senators and the-supreme-chancellor-hostage,  fox led a-company of the-coruscant-guard to cut off  fox escape.
unfortunately, cad-bane had rigged the-chamber and the-hostages with explosives.
seeing this,  fox ordered  fox men to stand down and allowed the-bounty-hunter and  fox team to leave the-senate-building
like every-other-clone-trooper in the-guard, fox was bound by honor and duty to protect and serve the-supreme-chancellor and the-members of the-galactic-senate.
utterly fearless, fox was always the first to lead the-charge into battle, even in the-most-perilous-combat-situations.
fox-unquestionable-loyalty meant fox would carry out fox orders without question, even if his-orders meant killing a-jedi or another-"brother".
fox-exemplary-performance has made fox one of the-most-highly-decorated-soldiers in the-republic-army.
additional-sources state that fox continued fox duty on coruscant, until an-error on fox part led darth-vader to execute fox by force snapping fox neck.
commander-thire ====
commander-thire, cc-4477, is a-coruscant-guard-clone-shock-trooper who served as a-lieutenant in the-coruscant-guard of the-grand-army of the-republic.
during the-clone-wars, he accompanied grand-master-yoda of the-jedi-order on an-diplomatic-assignment to meet with king-katuunko of toydaria.
in the-course of their-mission yoda inspired yoda clone troopers to take strength from his-clone-troopers-individual-traits, such as thire's-patience.
following the-initiation of order 66 and the-subsequent-confrontation between yoda-and-emperor-palpatine in 19-bby,-thire-and-thire-troopers were ordered to hunt the-jedi-master.
the-failure to locate thire-body convinced mas-amedda that yoda was still alive, leading the-emperor to order thire to resume the-search.
however, yoda succeeded in escaping from coruscant with the-aid of senator-bail-organa.
thire later accompanied palpatine to mustafar to recover the-critically-wounded-darth-vader.
legion ===
legion ===
is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic—in both-canon and legends—under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and padawan-commander-ahsoka-tano.
legion === fought against the-droid-forces of cis (the-confederacy of independent-systems) throughout the-clone-wars.
legion ===
first appears unnamed in revenge of the-sith under the-leadership of commander-appo, and they assault the-jedi-temple on coruscant under order 66.
legion === also appears extensively throughout star-wars-battlefront-video-game-franchise and the-clone-wars-television-series, under the-leadership of captain-rex of torrent-company.
in the-star-wars-legends expanded universe, after the-conversion of the-republic into the-galactic-empire, the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist") is placed under the-command of general maximilian veers that serves as darth-vader's-personal-battalion.
in current-canon-media, the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist") still remain under the-command of darth-vader's, however a-new-group named the first legion is established as a-new-group named the first legion personal task force, which recruits only from 501st ranks.
members of the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist")
the-501st-legion (nicknamed "vader's fist") wear armor with blue-markings.
the-unit is named after the-501st-legion-costuming-group.
notable-sub-divisions within the-501st
legion include: 332nd-company, which was active during the-clone-wars after former-jedi-padawan-ahsoka-tano left the-jedi-order.
when she returned to help republic-forces stage an-invasion of mandalore, the-company—alongside clone-commander-ct-7567-"rex" and clone-captain-ct-0292-"vaughn"— was assigned to aid she.
after order 66 is issued, the-332nd's-star-destroyer crash lands on the-surface of an-unnamed-moon, killing all except ahsoka, rex, and maul, who manage to escape; the-troopers under the-command of ahsoka tano have orange-marks on the-troopers under the-command of ahsoka tano helmets.
ahsoka and rex have dug graves for the-fallen-soldiers as a-memorial to the-fallen-soldiers.
torrent-company was an-elite-military-unit led by clone-captain-ct-7567-"rex", who served as first-in-command to jedi-general-anakin-skywalker.
torrent-company is distinguished for torrent-company engagements against the-confederacy of independent-systems throughout the-war, including the-battle of christophsis, battle of teth, and the-battle of horain.
torrent-company died along with the-332nd soon after order 66.during-star-wars-celebration 2016, dave-filoni stated that in a-planned-story-arc for the-clone-wars, ahsoka, who has left the jedi order, is given command of part of the-501st-legion, including captain-rex; those under her-command repaint those under her-command helmets orange and adorn those under her-command with ahsoka's togruta markings.
she leads them at the-siege of mandalore, which takes place at the-same-time as the-beginning of revenge of the-sith.
it would later be a-part of the-new-season-7-episodes on disney+.
commander-appo ====
commander-appo, cc-1119, served in the-501st-legion under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, in which he and other-members of the-501st carry out order 66 and follow anakin, now-darth-vader, in attacking the-jedi-temple on coruscant.
he stops senator-bail-organa from entering the-jedi-temple.
appo later appears in season four of the-clone-wars-television-series as a-sergeant in the-501st serving under clone-captain-rex.
appo-armor bears blue-markings.
in the-clone-wars-television-series, appo-helmet is adorned with a-white-arrow in reference to appa of the-avatar: the-last-airbender-television-series, on which the-clone-wars-supervising-director-dave-filoni worked.
captain-rex ====
captain-rex, ct-7567, leads torrent-company of the-501st-legion, often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano.
often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano
first appears in the-clone-wars-film and the-clone-wars-related-television-series, and often under the-command of jedi-general-anakin-skywalker and jedi-commander-ahsoka-tano is the-primary-clone-trooper-character of the-series.
in the-seventh-season of the-series (which overlaps with revenge of the-sith), captain-rex ==== is promoted to commander and leads part of the-501st-legion, called the-332nd-legion (ahsoka-troopers) in the-siege of mandalore alongside ahsoka.
when order 66 is issued, he attempts to execute ahsoka, but ahsoka removes he chip and restores he free will, before the-pair fake the-pair deaths and part-ways.
rex later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
now a-much-older-man because of rex accelerated aging, rex lives on the-wasteland-planet-seelos and hunted worm-like-joopa with fellow-clones-wolffe and gregor before fellow-clones-wolffe and gregor are offered a-place in the-rebel-alliance, which leads to rex reuniting with ahsoka.
in the-rebels-television-series-epilogue, it is mentioned that rex fought in several-battles throughout the-galactic-civil-war.
arc-trooper-fives ====
arc-trooper-fives, ct-27-5555, serves alongside fellow-arc-trooper-echo.
arc-trooper-fives ====
first appears in the-clone-wars-season one-episode-"rookies" as a-regular-trooper.
arc-trooper-fives ====
and  arc-trooper-fives-====-unit are assigned to a-remote-listening-outpost that is invaded by separatist-droids.
though the-invasion is successfully repelled, only-fives and fellow-arc-trooper-echo survive, and only-fives and echo are reassigned to the-501st-legion.
the-season-three-episode "clone-cadets" depicts fives and his-unit as cadets in training on kamino.
the-unit, called domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass the-unit, called domino squad final test.
fives and echo feel weighed down by the-others in the-squad and ask to be reassigned, but the-request is denied.
under the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, fives and echo recommit the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, fives and echo to domino, and the-squad is able to pass.
fives and echo are eventually promoted to arc-troopers together for fives and echo actions while defending kamino and continue serving with the-501st.
when assigned to the-command of jedi-general-pong-krell during the-campaign on umbara, fives finds krell's-disregard for clone-trooper lives appalling and openly disagrees with krell and with captain-rex, who is insistent on following orders.
after discovering how to pilot umbaran-fighters, fives, along with fellow-clones-jesse and hardcase disobey direct-orders and destroy umbaran-supply-ships delivering arms to the-umbaran-capital using the-starfighters, with hardcase sacrificing hardcase in the-process.
though their-actions allow a-republic-victory, krell, without process of a-court-martial, finds fives and jesse guilty of treason and sentences fives and jesse to execution by firing-squad.
however, fives urges his-fellow-troopers to see this as an-injustice, and the-firing-squad refuses to execute his.
after krell is ousted as a-republic-traitor, fives is freed from custody-and-aids-rex and the-501st in arresting krell, with clone-trooper-dogma eventually using fives’ blaster to execute krell.
in season six, during a-battle over ringo-vinda, fives and the-501st are winning the-battle until fellow-clone-tup mysteriously executes jedi-general-tiplar, forcing the-501st to retreat.
after rescuing tup from separatists and delivering him to kamino for a-medical-investigation, fives discovers a-mysterious-tumour in tup’s head before the latter dies.
after realising the-kaminoans intend to wipe realising the-kaminoans mind, fives launches realising the-kaminoans own investigation and realises the-“tumour” in tup’s-head is an-inhibitor-chip implanted in every-clone from a-young-stage.
jedi-master-shaak-ti brings jedi-master-shaak-ti to inform palpatine about the-chips, where palpatine, being the-true-mastermind behind the-conspiracy, reveals the-chips’ true purpose to fives.
realising the-kaminoans frames fives for an-assassination-attempt, initiating a-manhunt for fives.
with the-help of 501st-medic-kix, fives is able to contact rex and anakin-skywalker, and rex attempts to warn rex and anakin-skywalker of the-conspiracy and of palpatine's-involvement.
rex is ultimately killed by commander-fox of the-coruscant-guard and dies in rex's arms.
fives'-name is derived from rex-designation-number (ct-27-5555), which features fives in sequence.
rex is distinguished by a-goatee and a-stylized-numeral-five-tattoo on rex right-temple.
rex-armor bears blue-markings, and a-stylized-worm-creature adorns rex-helmets; after rex-promotion to arc-trooper, rex also wears light-gray-pauldrons on rex shoulders and
kilt-like-kama painted with blue-stripes.
kilt-like kama regards duty and honor above orders and protocol, feeling that there is no-honor in following foolish-orders and marching to  kilt-like-kama-death.
kilt-like-kama insists that clone-troopers be referred to by name, not number, and that clone-troopers are soldiers, not units, and should be treated as such.
kilt-like-kama is a-close-friend of rex and, after the-apparent-death of echo, considers  kilt-like-kama best-friend to be fellow-trooper-tup, who aids fives against krell and is one of the first to refuse executing fives when given the-order by krell.
when tup begins behaving abnormally due to tup inhibitor chip malfunctioning, fives goes to great-lengths and disregards order to attempt to save tup's life and, later, discover the-true-cause of tup's death.
with his-dying-words, his describes attempting to expose the-conspiracy to have been his-duty.
trooper-echo ====
arc-trooper-echo, ct-21-0408, sometimes-ct-1409, serves alongside fellow-arc-trooper-fives.
he first appears in the-clone-wars-season one-episode-"rookies" as a-regular-trooper.
he and he unit are assigned to a-remote-listening-outpost that is invaded by separatist-droids.
though the-invasion is successfully repelled, only-echo and fives survive, and the-invasion are reassigned to the-501st-legion.
the-season-three-episode "clone-cadets" depicts echo and his-unit as cadets in training on kamino.
the-unit, called domino squad, is initially unable to work together to pass the-unit, called domino squad final test.
echo and fives feel weighed down by the-others in the-squad and ask to be reassigned, but the-request is denied.
under the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, echo and fives recommit the-advice of jedi-general-shaak-ti, echo and fives to domino, and the-squad is able to pass.
echo and fives are eventually promoted to arc-troopers together for echo and fives actions while defending kamino and continue serving with the-501st.
echo is apparently killed in an-explosion during a-rescue-operation in the-season-three-episode "counter-attack".
story reels for a-previously-unfinished-four-episode-arc called "bad batch" (initially-part of the-clone-wars-legacy-project, the-episodes were later released on disney+
in their-completed-state) revealed that echo survived and was captured by the-separatists.
he was modified into a-cyborg able to communicate directly to computers and tasked with decoding the-republic-strategy-algorithm.
echo is rescued by captain-rex, and with he ability to understand separatist-transmissions
, he plays a-key-role in the-battle of anaxes, earning a-victory against the-separatists.
after the-mission, echo decided to join clone-force 99.
echo's-armor bears blue-markings, and a-blue-handprint adorns he-chest-plate, created when captain-rex touched his-chest-plate while covered in eel-blood during echo's-first-mission.
after his-promotion to arc-trooper, echo also wears light-gray-pauldrons on his-shoulders and a-kilt-like-kama painted in an-asymmetrical-white-and-blue-design.
later, after his-rescue from separatist-capture, his is visibly a-cyborg, with various-apparatus protruding from his-head and a-droid-plug in place of his-right-hand; post-rescue, his takes to wearing what appears to be a-stripped-down-variant on standard-phase-ii-armor.
throughout his-appearances, his is characterized as one who strictly follows orders, regulations, and protocol.
echo's-name is given to his by domino-squad on kamino as a-sarcastic-reference to his-tendency to immediately repeat orders, even if domino-squad already heard.
arc-lieutenant-jesse ====
arc-lieutenant-jesse, ct-5597, is a-member in the-501st-legion.
in season four' battle of umbara, jesse, like fives comes to consider general-pong-krell to be ruthless and reckless (mainly over the-casualty-numbers).
general-pong-krell later helps fives and hardcase on a-rogue-mission to destroy a-separatist-supply-ship, which succeeds at the-cost of hardcase's life.
in season seven, he takes part in the-siege of mandalore, during which he is captured and interrogated by maul, and later attempts to execute ahsoka-tano when order 66 is issued.
after commander-rex has commander-rex chip removed and sides with ahsoka, jesse accuses he of treason and tries to kill he as well, but dies along with all-the-troopers aboard when-the-venator-class-star-destroyer they are on crashes on a-small-moon, and is buried by ahsoka and rex.
jesse is distinguished by jesse shaved hair with the-republic-symbol tattooed on most of jesse head.
jesse-armor bears blue-markings with the-republic-symbol on the-center.
trooper-kix ====
kix, ct-6116, is a-medic serving in the-501st-legion.
in season six, kix aids fives, a-fugitive because a-medic serving in the-501st
legion discovered the-inhibitor-chip-conspiracy.
the-short-story "the-crimson-corsair and the-lost-treasure of count-dooku" reveals that this-action prompted count-dooku to capture kix, who discovered the-inhibitor-chip-conspiracy by the-time of a-medic serving in the-501st-legion-capture.
with droids failing to secure a-confession, kix was frozen in stasis for delivery to dooku.
the-ship crashed into a-planet during a randomized hyperspace jump to escape a-republic-attack and protect "dooku's-prize".
fifty years later, kix is released from stasis by pirates searching for "the-lost-treasure of count-dooku".
kix is taken aboard  the-ship and welcomed to their-endeavor of raiding forgotten-separatist-bases.
kix is distinguished by kix shaved hair and a-phrase translating to "a-good-droid is a-dead-one" tattooed across kix head.
kix-armor bears blue-markings, and his-armor bears a red insignia marking kix as a-medic.
he is "dedicated to preserving the-life of he brothers", and he even tells an-injured-captain-rex, "as the-team-medic, when it comes to the-health of the-men, including you, i outrank everyone."
however, he still has "no-qualms about fighting the-enemy".
trooper-tup ====
tup, ct-5385, was part of the-501st-legion under captain-rex.
he served in the-umbara-campaign and was key to the-capture of treasonous-jedi-general-pong-krell, supporting and siding with he friend fives even after fives had been condemned to death by krell and stunning the-jedi after a-fierce-battle with mutinous-501st-clones led by rex.
in the-sixth-season, tup suffered a-malfunction in a-biotechnical-chip implanted in tup brain shortly after tup creation by the-kaminoans.
intended to ensure that the-clones obeyed order 66, a-biotechnical-chip implanted in his-brain shortly after his-creation by the-kaminoans caused tup to shoot and kill jedi-general-tiplar despite not having been ordered to.
as tup was being shipped back to kamino for evaluation, tup was kidnapped by the-separatists (who wanted to know why a-biotechnical-chip implanted in his-brain shortly after his-creation by the kaminoans had malfunctioned), only to be recovered shortly afterwards.
tup's-actions led to the-discovery of the-chips by both-the-jedi and the-clones themselves, but tup died of medical-complications soon afterwards.
though fives attempted to avenge tup's-death by finding the-truth behind the-chips,
though was killed before
though could reveal what  though had learned, with tup's-actions and death officially declared to be the-result of a-locally-acquired-virus.
tup's-armor featured the-blue-markings common in the-501st, as well as an-image of a-single-blue-teardrop underneath the-right-eye of
though helmet; this matched a-tattoo on
though-face.
212th-attack-battalion ===
212th-attack-battalion ==
is a-division of the-grand-army of the-republic under the-command of jedi-general-obi-wan-kenobi and his subordinate,-commander-cody.
the-212th fought against the-droid-forces of the-confederacy of independent-systems throughout the-clone-wars.
a-component of the-7th-sky-corps of the-third-systems-army, a-component of the-7th-sky-corps of the-third-systems-army consisted of both-standard-clone-infantry-and-clone-paratroopers.
the-battalion fought on a-multitude of worlds throughout the-clone-wars, including early-campaigns on christophsis, teth, ryloth, saleucami and geonosis, to latter-battles on kiros, sarrish, moorjhone and umbara.
the-212th was also involved in numerous-special-operations-missions; which included an-infiltration-mission on lola-sayu.
by the-third-and-last-year of the-conflict, the-212th led an-invasion of the-separatist-controlled-worlds, including anaxes and utapau.
during the-latter-battle, kenobi killed general-grievous, marking a-major-loss for the-separatists and bringing the-republic one step closer to winning the-war.
however, kenobi was ultimately betrayed by kenobi soldiers upon the-activation of order 66, a protocol that called for the-extermination of all-jedi.
the-clones failed to execute the-clones former-leader, however.
following the-proclamation of the-new-order, the-212th was folded into the-armed-forces of the-galactic-empire.
during their-days in service to the-new-government, with general-kahdah as the-commanding-officer, the-battalion was dispatched to the-wookiee-homeworld of kashyyyk where the-battalion suppressed an-indigenous-uprising.
notable-sub-divisions within the-212th-attack-battalion include: ghost-company - participated in several-battles and campaigns.
most-ghost-company clone troopers bore orange-markings on most-ghost-company
clone-troopers-standard-clone-trooper-armor.
many also had customized-helmet-coloration-designs.
foxtrot-group - an-elite-commando-unit, led by clone-captain-gregor, within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic.
it was attached in direct-support to the-212th-attack-battalion and was deployed during the-battle of sarrish, though many of the-212th-attack-battalion troopers perished in the-battle of sarrish.
commander cody ====
commander-cody, cc-2224, leads the-212th-attack-battalion under the-command of jedi-general-obi-wan-kenobi.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith during the-battle of utapau, aiding obi-wan against general-grievous on utapau.
he is the-first-clone-trooper to receive order 66 on-screen, and he obediently commands he troopers to shoot down obi-wan and to locate he body to confirm the-kill.
cody later appears in the-clone-wars-film and the-clone-wars-related-television-series.
cody is distinguished by a-scar on the-left-side of cody face.
cody-armor bears orange-markings, and cody wears visors on cody helmets.
cody is characterized as a cautious but "natural-and-practical-leader" whose-"keen-ability to strategize, combined with cody fierce combat style in the-heat of battle, earned cody the-respect of the-jedi, and of cody fellow clones".
he is also noted to adhere to standard-procedures and protocol.
cody is particularly loyal to obi-wan, whom cody complemented well, and obi-wan, whom he complemented well-relationship is characterized by a-mutual-camaraderie and trust, though this did not prevent cody from attempting to kill kenobi as part of order 66.
cody is also friends with captain-rex, having completed many-missions together.
captain-gregor ====
captain-gregor, ct-5576-39, is the-former-leader of foxtrot-group, an-elite-commando-unit within the-special-operations-brigade of the-grand-army of the-republic, attached in direct-support to the-212th-attack-battalion.
the-212th-attack-battalion is introduced in the-season five episode "missing in action"—suffering amnesia and living on the-distant-planet-abafar, where a-stranded-d-squad—a-republic-covert-ops-unit consisting of droids looking for a-separatist-decoding-chip—discovers the-212th-attack-battalion working as a-dishwasher in a-diner.
it is revealed that the-212th-attack-battalion lost the-212th-attack-battalion memories and sense of identity after a-shuttle-crash during the-devastating-battle of sarrish.
the-212th-attack-battalion was rescued by the-212th-attack-battalion employer, who keeps gregor's-true-identity from the-212th-attack-battalion to prevent the-212th-attack-battalion from leaving, but gregor is able to regain gregor sense of duty and gregor armor to help the-republic.
gregor holds off separatist-droids to allow the-republic-mission to escape, and despite gregor promise to make gregor way home, gregor is seemingly killed in an-explosion of rhydonium.
he later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
he is revealed to have removed he inhibitor chip, preventing he from carrying out order 66.
now-a-much-older-man because of he accelerated aging, he lives on the-wasteland-planet seelos and hunts worm-like-joopa with captain-rex (ct-7567) and commander-wolffe (ct-3636).
sometime after the-clone-wars, he suffered a-brain-injury, causing he to suffer brief-periods of apparent-insanity.
when the-spectres, a-team of rebels from the-planet-lothal, arrive on seelos to ask for help, he initially declines, but eventually assists help in fending off an-imperial-attack after wolffe inadvertently exposes help to the-empire.
he later took part in a-final-battle to free lothal from imperial-control, where he was fatally wounded by an-imperial-technician.
gregor's-commando-armor bears yellow-markings and an-off-white-camouflage-pattern, and gregor-helmet is adorned with hash-marks modeled after those on gerry-cheevers'-hockey-mask.
special-operations-brigade ===
special-operations-brigade (sobde)—a.k.a.
gar-special-forces—was a-brigade of elite-clone-troopers in the-grand-army of the-republic under the-command of jedi-general-arligan-zey and jedi-general iri-camas.
within the-film-series and in the-star-wars expanded universe-media, the-brigade contained highly-specialized-elite-republic-special-forces-soldiers enhanced with genetic-experimentation, including clone-commandos, advanced-reconnaissance-commandos (arc-troopers), alpha-class-arcs, null-class-arcs, clone-assassins, clone-shadow-troopers, covert-operations-clone-troopers, and special-operation-clone-troopers who usually work alone.
all-clone-commandos and arcs were trained by mandalorian-mercenaries.
the-style and color of a-clone-troopers-armor often varies depending on a-clone-troopers-armor rank, specialization, unit, or environment, for example, the-clone-troopers on kashyyyk wear camouflage-green-scout-style-armour whereas the-501st-legion wears standard-white-armor with blue-accents.
another-example is the-aquatic-scuba-troopers, who appear in the-film-series star-wars: clone-wars.
scuba-troopers are equipped with high-tech-breathing-apparatuses and long-range-blaster-rifles.
clone-force 99 ====
clone-force 99—informally known as "the-bad-batch"—was a-clone-commando-squad consisting of four-clone-troopers with personality-quirks that only slightly resemble normal clones—the-result of specially-designed-genetic-experimentation.
their-names were "crosshair," a-scout-sniper-specialist with brilliant-eyesight-abilities; "wrecker," a-reckless-heavy-ordnance-specialist with enhanced-muscular-form; "tech," a-security-specialist with enhanced-mental-capacity and intelligence; and squad-leader-clone-sergeant-"hunter," a-cqc-specialist with enhanced-sensory-abilities.
the-squad had maintained an-impressive-100%-mission-completion-ratio, but were notorious for
the-squad-insubordination and considered
the squad superior to other-special-operations-units.
the-squad was introduced in  the-squad self-titled story arc of the-seventh-season of the-clone-wars-animated-series, where  the-squad came to anaxes to assist anakin-skywalker, obi-wan-kenobi, and rex on
the-squad-mission to investigate a-source of separatist'-victories, as well as trying to rescue echo, the-arc-trooper who was presumed dead on lola-sayu, now revealed to have been captured by the-techno-union and held on skako-minor.
following their-mission, echo decided to join clone-force 99.
in july 2020, echo was announced that clone-force 99 would be receiving clone-force 99 own spin-off series in 2021 on disney+
titled "the bad batch" and will follow clone-force-99-actions in the-early-days of the-empire.
====-05-commando-battalion ==== 05
commando-battalion was one of 10-units of commando-groups within the-grand-army of the-republic's-special-operations-brigade.
commando-battalion held five-companies, with each-consisting of 100-commandos per company, which accounted for 25-squads.
within commando-battalion, arca-company was housed, who also held delta-squad-and-omega-squad.
veshok-squad was also housed in a-separate-company.
during the-clone-wars, jedi-general-bardan-jusik was placed in charge of the-unit, until jedi-general-bardan-jusik stepped down from the-jedi-order and as a-military-general.
when jedi-general-bardan-jusik stepped down, jedi-general-etain-tur-mukan was placed in charge.
notable-sub-divisions within the-05-commando-battalion include:  veshok-squad is a-unit of four-republic-commandos, a-type of specialized-clone-trooper.
the-squad is introduced in the-video-game
star-wars:
republic-commando and featured thorough the republic-commando novels by karen-traviss, and republic-commando troopers make a-brief-appearance in the-clone-wars-television-series.
delta is led by sergeant-boss, rc-1138 and often referred to as simply 38; he is distinguished by orange-markings on he armor, and he is voiced by temuera-morrison.
scorch, rc-1262 and
often referred to as simply 62, is the-squad's-demolitions-expert and has a-jocular-sense of humor; the-squad's-demolitions-expert is distinguished by yellow-markings on the-squad's-demolitions-expert armor, and the-squad's-demolitions-expert is voiced by raphael-sbarge.
sev, rc-1207 and often referred to as simply 07, is the-group's-sniper and is characterized as grim.
during a-mission on kashyyyk at the-end of the-clone-wars, depicted at the-end of republic-commando, sev's-transmission-signal is lost, and sev is declared missing in action; sev ultimate fate is uncertain.
sev is distinguished by red-markings on sev armor, and sev is voiced by jonathan-david-cook.
fixer, rc-1140 and often referred to as simply 40, is the-hacker and technical-expert and is characterized as distant and stern; sev is distinguished by green-markings on sev armor, and sev is voiced by andrew-chaikin.
omega-squad is a-unit of four-republic-commandos featured in the-"republic-commando"-novels.
the-members wear black-armor, and each-man is the-sole-survivor of each-man previous-unit.
omega-squad is led by sergeant-niner, rc-1309, who is characterized as serious and protective of the-other-men.
darman, rc-1136, is a-demolitions-expert; darman falls in love with jedi-etain-tur-mukan, and darman, rc-1136 have a-child.
fi, rc-8015, is the-squad's-sniper and medic, and darman is described as seemingly easy-going but troubled by the-denial of a-normal-life.
fi suffers a-brain-injury in true-colors and is declared legally dead when  fi falls into a-coma; medical-procedure requires  fi be euthanized, but  fi is taken to mandalore where  fi eventually makes a-full-recovery.
atin, rc-3222, is the-squad's-technical-expert, and  fi is described as quiet but deeply stubborn.
atin was trained by walon-vau, unlike the-others, and atin initially harbors deep-resentments for walon-vau.
corr, ct-5108/8843 later rc-5108/8843, joins the-squad upon fi's-injury.
corr is a-regular-trooper who served as a-bomb-disposal-expert; because of an-injury, both-arms from the-elbows are prosthetic.
notable-commanders === ====
commander-gree ====
commander-gree, cc-1004, leads the-41st-elite-corps under the-command of jedi-general-luminara-unduli.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith aiding jedi-general-yoda on kashyyyk.
he attempts to carry out order 66, but he and another-kashyyyk-scout-trooper are decapitated by yoda.
he later appears in the-first-and-second-seasons of the-clone-wars-television-series serving under luminara.
gree is distinguished by he dyed red-hair shaved into two-parallel-stripes and eyebrows dyed to match he hair.
he armor bears green-markings, and he appears in green-camouflage-armor in revenge of the-sith.
commander-bly ====
commander-bly, cc-5052, leads the-327th-star-corps under the-command of jedi-general-aayla-secura.
he first appears in episode iii: revenge of the-sith, in which he and he men carry out order 66 and shoot aayla in the-back, killing aayla.
he later appears in season one of the-clone-wars-television-series alongside aayla.
bly is distinguished by  bly close-shaved hair and yellow-rectangular-tattoos on  bly cheeks.
bly-armor bears yellow-markings, and  bly wears a-brown-pauldron on  bly left shoulder, a-kilt-like-kama, and binocular-attachments on  bly helmets.
bly is known as a-dependable-soldier who greatly values the-success of the-mission, and  bly has a-"close-working-relationship" with aayla and respects her-dedication to achieving her-objectives.
commander-neyo ====
marshal-commander-neyo, cc-8826, leads the-91st-mobile-reconnaissance-corps, with initial-command given to jedi-general-mace-windu in the-battle of ryloth and battle of anaxes; command was later transferred to jedi-generals-adi-gallia and stass-allie.
aside from barc-speeders, the-91st-mobile-reconnaissance-corps utilized at-ap-walkers, and at-rt walkers.
the-elite-cavalry-unit lightning-squadron was part of the-91st-reconnaissance-corps.
as the-war with the-confederacy of independent-systems progressed, in 20-bby, the-republic-military formed a-special-covert-ops-team of droids known as d-squad;
consisted of four-astromech-droids, r2-d2, qt-kt, u9-c4, and m5-bz, neyo's-dum-series-pit-droid, designated wac-47, and was placed under the-command of colonel-meebur-gascon.
d-squad's-primary-objective was to infiltrate a-separatist-providence-class-carrier/destroyer and steal an-encryption-module that was housed aboard, which was successful.
later, the-commander attended a-republic-strategy-conference at the-valor-space-station located in the-carida-system.
during a-republic-strategy-conference at the-valor-space-station located in the-carida-system, a-separatist-attack on the-valor-space-station located in the-carida-system was thwarted by the-members of d-squad.
neyo and neyo troops were stationed on the-outer-rim-world of saleucami, under the-command of jedi-general-stass-allie, in the-waning-days of the-clone-wars.
while patrolling the-planet's-surface, the-commander received a-message from supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine instructing supreme-chancellor-sheev-palpatine to execute order 66.
neyo fired  neyo barc speeder's laser cannons on the-general, adding allie to the-list of jedi who perished.
after the-transformation of the-galactic-republic into the-galactic-empire, 91st-recon-corps was folded into the-imperial-army.
neyo had a-specialized-helmet similar to that of commander-wolffe, and sported a-sash on commander-wolffe armor, and a small, grey, shoulder-pauldron over commander-wolffe right-shoulder as well.
commander-wolffe ====
commander-wolffe, cc-3636, leads the-104th-battalion under the-command of jedi-general-plo-koon.
jedi-general-plo-koon is introduced in the-clone-wars-season one episode "rising-malevolence".
jedi-general-plo-koon is the-first-officer aboard plo's flagship triumphant when plo is destroyed by general-grievous and is one of three-clones to survive.
afterward, jedi-general-plo-koon appears with a-redesigned-character-model, including a-cybernetic-eye-implant, and leads a-tight-knit-unit nicknamed wolfpack on the-battlefield.
jedi-general-plo-koon later appears in the-rebels-television-series, set fourteen years after revenge of the-sith.
wolffe is revealed to have removed  wolffe inhibitor chip, preventing  wolffe from carrying out order 66.
now a-much-older-man because of  wolffe accelerated aging,  wolffe lives on the-wasteland-planet seelos and hunts worm-like-joopa with rex and gregor.
when rex and gregor are sought by the-rebel-protagonists,  wolffe is suspicious of rex and gregor motives and contacts the-empire to protect himself, rex, and gregor.
rex convinces rex that the-rebels can be trusted, and  wolffe regrets  wolffe actions.
wolffe then thwarts an-incoming-attack from empire to save the-rebels, and
later on helps them free them planet from imperial-occupation once and for all.
wolffe is distinguished by a-scar running through wolffe eye and a-silver-cybernetic-eye-implant.
wolffe-armor is adorned with a-gray-stylized-likeness of a-wolf, and wolffe wears a-kilt-like-kama.
wolffe is characterized as detail-oriented and as having "a-sense of strategy superior to that of most-clone-officers, making wolffe a highly effective complement to plo. "
he is impatient with missions that send he away from the-battlefield and becomes quickly exasperated with garrulous-protocol-droid-c-3po.
reception ==
graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter felt the-decision to make an-army of clones is a-"softening of the-star-wars'-own-mythology", though the-article later corrected that not-all-troopers in the-franchise were clones.
noting that the-films never specify that the-clone-troopers are replaced by regular-soldiers by the-original-trilogy, graeme-mcmillan of the-hollywood-reporter believed that the-idea of soldiers who are created solely for war and are little more than machines "sanitizes the-war of the-franchise's-title".
he praised the-decision of the-force awakens to explicitly move away from clone-troopers as bringing "much-needed-moral-complexity" to the-film's-conflict.
the-story-arcs and character-development of various-clone-trooper-characters in the-animated-series star-wars:
star-wars: was met with praise from both-fans and critics alike, with many-clones such as captain-rex becoming fan-favorite-characters.
see also ==
stormtrooper-(star-wars)
legion-captain-rex-galactic-republic-galactic-empire
mandalorians-spartiate ==
references == ===
citations === ===
sources === ==
external-links ==
clone-troopers in the-starwars.com-databank-clone-trooper on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker (also known as star-wars: episode-ix –
the-rise of skywalker) is a-2019-american-epic-space-opera-film produced, co-written, and directed by j.-j.-abrams.
produced by lucasfilm-and-abrams'-production-company-bad-robot-productions, and distributed by walt-disney-studios-motion-pictures, it is the-third-installment of the-star-wars sequel-trilogy, following the force awakens (2015) and the-last-jedi (2017), and the-final-episode of the-nine-part-"skywalker-saga".
the-film's-ensemble-cast includes carrie-fisher, mark-hamill, adam-driver, daisy-ridley, john-boyega, oscar-isaac, anthony-daniels, naomi-ackie, domhnall-gleeson, richard-e.-grant, lupita-nyong'o, keri-russell, joonas-suotamo, kelly-marie-tran, ian-mcdiarmid, and billy-dee-williams.
the-rise of skywalker follows rey, finn, and poe-dameron as they lead the-resistance's-final-stand against supreme-leader-kylo-ren and the-first-order, who are aided by the-return of the-deceased-galactic-emperor,-palpatine.
following initial-reports that the-last-jedi-director-rian-johnson would write the-script for episode-ix, in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a-script with colin-trevorrow collaborator derek connolly; both ultimately retain story-credit with abrams and chris-terrio.
in september 2017, colin-trevorrow left the-project following creative-differences with producer-kathleen-kennedy, and abrams returned as director.
john-williams, composer for the-previous-episodic-films, returned to compose the-score for the-last-time for the-franchise.
principal-photography began in august 2018 at pinewood-studios in england and wrapped in february 2019, with post-production completed in november 2019.
with an-estimated-budget of $275 million, it is one of the-most-expensive-films ever made.
the-film premiered in los-angeles on december 16, 2019, and was released in the-united-states on december 20.
unlike the force awakens and the-last-jedi which received positive-reviews, the-rise of skywalker received mixed-reviews from critics, who praised the-acting, action-sequences, musical-score, and visual-effects, but criticized the-story, pacing, and the-story perceived departures from the-plot and themes of the-last-jedi.
the-film grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the-seventh-highest-grossing-film of 2019; although  the-film was the-lowest-grossing-installment of the-trilogy,  the-film turned an-estimated-net-profit of $300 million.
the-film received three-nominations at the-92nd-academy-awards (best-original-score, best-visual-effects, and best-sound-editing) as well as three at the-73rd-british-academy-film-awards (also-best-special-visual-effects, best-original-music, and best-sound).
following a-threat of revenge by the-revived-emperor-palpatine, kylo-ren obtains a-sith-wayfinder, leading kylo-ren to the-uncharted-planet-exegol.
there, he finds palpatine, who reveals that he created snoke as a-puppet to control the-first-order and lure kylo to the-dark-side.
palpatine unveils the-final-order—a-secret-armada of star-destroyers—and tells kylo to find and kill rey, who is continuing her-jedi-training under resistance-leader-leia-organa.
finn and poe-dameron deliver intelligence from a-spy that palpatine is on exegol; rey has learned from luke-skywalker's-notes that a-sith-wayfinder can lead them there.
rey, finn, poe, chewbacca, bb-8, and c-3po depart in the-millennium-falcon to pasaana, where a-clue to a-wayfinder is hidden.
kylo initiates a-force-bond with rey to discover her-location; kylo travels to pasaana with kylo warrior subordinates, the-knights of ren.
with the-help of lando-calrissian, rey and her-friends find the-clue—a-dagger inscribed with sith-text, which c-3po's-programming forbids him from interpreting—and the-remains of a-jedi-hunter named ochi and him ship.
rey senses kylo nearby and faces rey.
the-first-order captures the-falcon, chewbacca, and the-dagger; attempting to save chewbacca, rey accidentally destroys a-first-order-transport with force-lightning.
believing chewbacca to be dead, the-group escapes on ochi's-ship.
the-group travels to kijimi, where a-droidsmith extracts the-sith-text from c-3po's-memory, revealing coordinates to a-wayfinder.
rey senses chewbacca is alive, and the-group mounts a-rescue-mission to kylo's-star-destroyer.
rey recovers the-dagger and has visions of ochi killing  rey parents with the-dagger.
kylo informs kylo that kylo is palpatine's-granddaughter; the-sith-lord had ordered ochi to recover  rey as a-child, but kylo hid kylo on jakku to protect kylo.
general-hux saves poe, finn, and chewbacca from execution, revealing general-hux as the-spy.
general-hux permits the-group to escape on the-falcon but is discovered and killed by allegiant-general-pryde.
the-group flies the-falcon to the-wayfinder's-coordinates on a-moon in the-endor-system.
rey retrieves the-wayfinder from the-remains of the-second-death-star, but she is met by kylo, who destroys the-wayfinder and duels she.
in a-dying-act, she calls to kylo through the-force, distracting kylo as rey impales kylo.
sensing she's-death, rey heals kylo and takes rey ship to exile she on ahch-to.
there, luke's-force-spirit encourages rey to face palpatine and gives she leia's-lightsaber.
rey leaves for exegol in luke's-x-wing-fighter, using the-wayfinder from kylo's-ship.
meanwhile, kylo converses with a-memory of kylo father, han-solo; kylo throws away kylo lightsaber and reclaims kylo identity as ben-solo.
sensing-leia's-death and ben's-redemption
, palpatine sends one of palpatine superlaser-equipped star destroyers to destroy kijimi as a-show of force.
rey transmits her-coordinates to r2-d2, allowing the-resistance—now led by poe and finn—to follow her to exegol.
there, she confronts palpatine; palpatine demands that she kill palpatine for palpatine spirit to pass into she.
lando brings reinforcements from across the-galaxy to join the-battle.
ben overpowers the-knights of ren and joins rey, but palpatine drains the-knights of ren power to rejuvenate palpatine.
palpatine incapacitates ben and attacks the-resistance-fleet with force-lightning.
weakened, rey hears the-voices of past-jedi, who lend her their-strength.
palpatine attacks  palpatine with lightning, but rey deflects it using luke and leia's-lightsabers, killing  palpatine before dying  palpatine.
ben uses the-force to revive  palpatine at the-cost of ben own life; they share a-kiss before ben dies.
the-resistance defeats palpatine's-armada, while people across the-galaxy rise up against the-first-order.
the-resistance returns to the-resistance base to celebrate.
after the-celebration, rey visits luke's-abandoned-childhood-home on tatooine and buries rey and leia's-lightsabers.
a-passerby asks  a-passerby name; as the-spirits of luke and leia watch,  a-passerby replies, "rey-skywalker."
==-cast ==
carrie-fisher as leia-organa, the-force-sensitive-leading-general of the-resistance, mother to ben-solo, rey-skywalker twin-sister, and rey-skywalker daughter.
fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the-use of repurposed-unreleased-footage from the force awakens.
mark-hamill as luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi-master and maternal-uncle of kylo-ren.
he became one with the-force in the-last-jedi.
adam-driver as ben-solo-/-kylo-ren, the-supreme-leader of the-first-order.
adam-driver is the-son of leia-organa and han-solo, and the-grandson of anakin-skywalker.
daisy-ridley as rey, a-former-scavenger from jakku, member of the-resistance, and the-next-jedicailey-fleming and josefine-irrera-jackson as young rey john boyega as finn, a-member of the-resistance and a-former-stormtrooper-(fn-2187) who defected from the-first-order
oscar-isaac as poe-dameron, a-high-ranking-x-wing-fighter-pilot and commander of the-resistance who later inherits the-rank of general from leia-anthony-daniels as c-3po, a-humanoid-protocol-droid in the-service of general-organa-naomi-ackie as jannah, a-former-stormtrooper of the-first-order (tz-1719) living on the-planet kef-bir, who aids the-resistance domhnall gleeson as general-hux, the-first-order's third in-command richard e. grant as allegiant-general-pryde, a-high-ranking-general in the-first-order, who previously served in the-galactic-empire
lupita-nyong'o as maz-kanata, a-former-space-pirate and ally of the-resistance keri-russell as zorii-bliss, an-old-acquaintance of poe's from kijimi-joonas-suotamo as chewbacca, a-wookiee and first-mate of the-millennium-falcon-kelly-marie-tran as rose-tico, a-mechanic in the-resistance and friend of finn-ian-mcdiarmid as emperor-palpatine, the-resurrected-dark-lord of the-sith and rey's-paternal-grandfather
billy-dee-williams
as lando-calrissian, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance, a-former-owner of the-millennium-falcon, and an-old-friend of chewbaccabillie-lourd and greg-grunberg reprise their-roles as lieutenant-kaydel-ko-connix and temmin "snap" wexley respectively.
additionally, dominic-monaghan portrays resistance-trooper beaumont-kin, shirley-henderson-voices-babu-frik, and nick-kellington portrays klaud via capture-performance.
hassan-taj and lee-towersey perform the-role of r2-d2, while dave-chapman and brian-herring return as the-puppeteers of bb-8, and director-j.-j.-abrams also provides the-voice for d-o.-martin-wilde, anton-simpson-tidy, lukaz-leong, tom-rodgers, joe-kennard, and ashley-beck appear as the-knights of ren.
amanda-lawrence reprises amanda-lawrence role as commander-larma-d’acy, while vinette-robinson plays amanda-lawrence wife, pilot-wrobie-tyce.
jodie-comer and billy-howle briefly appear as rey's-parents, while tom-wilton and screenwriter chris-terrio briefly appear as the-performer and voice for aftab-ackbar, the-son of admiral-ackbar, respectively; and mike-quinn and kipsang-rotich return as the-performer and voice of nien-nunb, respectively.
denis-lawson and warwick-davis briefly reprise denis-lawson and warwick-davis roles as wedge-antilles, a-veteran of the-rebel-alliance; and wicket-w.-warrick, now-the-leader of the-ewoks, respectively.
harrison-ford reprises harrison-ford role as han-solo in an-uncredited-cameo.
composer-john-williams-cameos as oma-tres, a-kijimi-bartender, kevin-smith cameos as a-kijimi-inhabitant, and abrams' frequent composer collaborator michael giacchino cameos as a-sith-trooper, while lin-manuel miranda and jeff garlin both cameo as human-and-alien-resistance-troopers, respectively.
ed-sheeran, karl-urban, dhani-harrison, nigel-godrich, j.-d.-dillard, and dave-hearn all-cameo as stormtroopers.
actors making reprisal-vocal-cameos include james-earl-jones as darth-vader, andy-serkis as snoke, and the-voices of several-past-jedi, including ewan-mcgregor and alec-guinness as obi-wan-kenobi (the latter via digitally-altered-archive-audio), hayden-christensen as anakin-skywalker, ashley-eckstein as ahsoka-tano, freddie-prinze-jr. as kanan-jarrus, olivia-d'abo as luminara-unduli, frank-oz as yoda, liam-neeson as qui-gon-jinn, jennifer-hale as aayla-secura, samuel-l.-jackson as mace-windu, and angelique-perrin as adi-gallia.
production == ===
development ===
in october 2012, star-wars-creator-george-lucas sold star-wars-creator-george-lucas production company lucasfilm to the-walt-disney-company.
the-walt-disney-company subsequently announced the-star-wars sequel trilogy.
in june 2014, the-walt-disney-company was announced that rian-johnson, writer and director of the-last-jedi, would write a-story-treatment for episode-ix.
however, star-wars-creator-george-lucas later stated that star-wars-creator-george-lucas was not involved in writing the-film.
in august 2015, colin-trevorrow was announced as the-director of the-film; colin-trevorrow was to write the-script with frequent-collaborator-derek-connolly.
=== pre-production ===
in february 2016, disney-chief-executive-officer-bob-iger confirmed that pre-production on episode-ix had begun.
carrie-fisher died in december 2016.
prior to the-release of the-film, carrie-fisher-brother-todd-fisher, who planned carrie-fisher-character-general-leia-organa to appear in the-film, carrie-fisher's-brother todd-fisher, who planned her-character before carrie-fisher-death, revealed that “carrie-fisher was going to be the-big-payoff in the-film, carrie-fisher's-brother todd-fisher, who planned her-character” and
“carrie-fisher was going to be the-last-jedi, so to speak.
”in august 2017, it was announced that jack-thorne would rewrite the-script.
in september 2017, lucasfilm stated that trevorrow had left the-production following creative-differences, resulting trevorrow working relationship with kathleen-kennedy to become unmanageable after failing to deliver a-satisfactory-script, despite writing several-drafts.
that same month, trevorrow was rumored as the-top-choice to replace trevorrow as director, but stated "it was never in the-plan for me to direct episode-ix", and later, j.-j.-abrams, the-director of the-force-awakens, was announced to return as the-director in episode-ix.the story team met with george-lucas before writing the-new-script to discuss the-nature of the-force.
abrams co-wrote the-new-script with chris-terrio, though trevorrow and connolly retain story-credits.
the-story was rewritten to some-extent before filming was completed.
the-film was produced by abrams'-company-bad-robot-productions, kathleen-kennedy, and michelle-rejwan.
according to terrio, the-film's-script had to include certain-narrative-beats provided by kennedy and rejwan, including the-redemption of the-character kylo-ren.
before filming, episode-ix was initially given the-working-title-black-diamond, which was then changed to trixie in 2018, so that the-roman-numeral-"ix" would be included in the-working-title.
the-film's-title, the-rise of skywalker, was announced at april-2019's-the-star-wars-celebration in chicago.
casting ===
carrie-fisher, who played leia-organa, died on december 27, 2016.
variety and reuters reported that she had been planned for a-key-role in episode-ix.
in january 2017, lucasfilm stated that there were no-plans to digitally generate fisher's-performance as lucasfilm had for rogue one (2016).
the following april, fisher's-brother todd revealed that fisher's-daughter, billie-lourd, had granted disney the-rights to use recent-footage of fisher.
however, a week later, kathleen-kennedy stated that fisher would not appear in the-film.
in july 2018, j.-j.-abrams announced that unused-footage of fisher from the-force-awakens would be used to help complete the-story.
in flashback-scenes, digital-de-aging was used for the-appearance of luke and leia through the-use of facial-shots of both-characters from the empire strikes back, and return of the-jedi respectively.
in july 2018, keri-russell was in talks to play a-part with some-"action-heavy-fight-scenes", and it was confirmed that billy-dee-williams would return as lando-calrissian, onscreen for the-first-time since 1983's-return of the-jedi—marking one of the-longest-intervals between portrayals of a-character by the-same-actor in american-film-history.
at the-end of july, russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an-announcement of returning and additional-new-cast-members.
in late-august, deadline-hollywood announced that dominic-monaghan and matt-smith had been cast in unspecified-roles, but matt-smith later denied matt-smith involvement.
greg-grunberg reprises greg-grunberg role as temmin "snap"-wexley.
at the-star-wars-celebration in april 2019, it was revealed via the-film's-teaser-trailer that ian-mcdiarmid would return to portray palpatine.
since the-event was held after principal-photography wrapped, abrams was thrilled that news of ian-mcdiarmid on the-set never leaked.
kathleen-kennedy said they decided to reveal palpatine's-return ahead of the-film's-release because of the-characters playing a-larger-role in the-story, having they differentiated from baby-yoda, the-character from the-mandalorian.
filming ===
principal-photography began on august 1, 2018, at pinewood-studios in buckinghamshire, england.
filming also took place in wadi-rum, jordan.
oscar-isaac stated that abrams was allowing more-improvised-acting than in the-previous-two-films.
due to the-tight-schedule, some-editing took place on set.
principal-photography wrapped on february 15, 2019.
footage from the-film was shown at the-walt-disney-company's-annual-shareholders-meeting on march 7, 2019.
two-weeks of reshoots took place at pinewood involving hamill, ridley, and isaac in july 2019.
another-round of reshoots took place between late-september and october.
post-production ===
the-visual-effects were created by industrial-light & magic and supervised by roger-guyett.
roger-guyett finished post-production on november 25, 2019.
after boyega accidentally left a-copy of the-script in boyega hotel room, a-copy of the-script was listed on ebay for around £65.
in january 2018, it was confirmed that john-williams would return to compose and conduct the-rise of skywalker.
the next month, john-williams announced that it would be the-last-star-wars-film for which john-williams would compose the-score.
in august 2019, it was revealed that williams had written about 35 of an-expected-135-minutes of music for the-film, which according to williams brother don, would incorporate all of the-major-themes of the-skywalker-saga.
scoring began in july 2019 with williams and william-ross conducting and orchestrating the-sessions over the-course of six-months.
the-official-soundtrack-album was released by walt-disney-records on december 20, 2019.
marketing ==
promotion ===
despite staying silent about many-details of the-film, abrams expressed abrams hopes that fans and general-audiences would be "satisfied".
abrams headed a-panel dedicated to the-film on april 12, 2019, during the-star-wars-celebration in chicago, where the-film's title was revealed.
additionally, the-story-events of the-disneyland-themed-area-star-wars: galaxy's-edge precede the-film, including the-millennium-falcon:
smugglers run motion-simulator, which features chewbacca.
on august 24, a-new-poster and "sizzle-reel" was released at d23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
the-footage includes a-montage of the-skywalker-saga so far, as well as several new shots from the-film.
tie-in literature and merchandise ===
a-publishing-campaign titled "journey to star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker" was announced on may 4, 2019.
the-rise of skywalker" includes the-novel-resistance-reborn, set between the-last-jedi and the-rise of skywalker, and various-other-titles.
from december 18, 2019, to march 11, 2020, a-prequel-graphic-novel titled the rise of kylo-ren, telling the-story of how ben-solo became kylo-ren and elaborating upon the-character's-backstory, was published by marvel-comics, written by charles-soule and illustrated by will-sliney.
the-official-novelization of the-rise of skywalker is by rae-carson:
hardcover-and-audiobook-versions were released on march 19, 2020.
the novel details palpatine's-return in more-depth : palpatine transferred palpatine consciousness into a-clone-body following palpatine death in return of the-jedi, and palpatine "son", rey's-father, was a-failed-clone of palpatine.
the-junior-novel and corresponding-audiobook are by michael-kogge and were released on april 21, 2020.
additionally, a-five-issue-marvel-comics-adaptation written by jody-houser and illustrated by will-sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the-film the first in the-franchise not to receive a-comic-adaptation.
video-games ===
the-video-game star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017) released a-free-level set on ajan-kloss.
in december 2019, the video game star-wars-battlefront-ii (2017)
fortnite-battle-royale released several-cosmetics featuring character-skins for rey, finn, a-sith-trooper, kylo-ren, and zorii-bliss along with a-tie-fighter-glider, a-millennium-falcon-glider (which was given to players for free from the-winterfest-event), four-emotes, and two-free-banners.
on december 14, fortnite's-publisher-epic-games released a-preview of the-film on an in-game theater screen as a-live-event.
at the-end of the-event, a-message from palpatine (the-one mentioned in the-film's-opening-crawl) was heard.
release == ===
theatrical ===
the-film was originally planned to be released in the-united-states on may 24, 2019, before being pushed back to december 20.
the-film had  the-film world premiere at the-tcl-chinese-theatre in los-angeles on december 16.
unlike most-studio-films, disney reportedly did not hold test-screenings for the-rise of skywalker, instead only showing  the-film to abrams'-friends and family, as well as a-terminally-ill-fan.
before  the-film's-release, disney issued a-warning that the-scenes with strobe-like-flashing-lights may trigger photosensitive-migraines and seizures during some of the-scenes with strobe-like-flashing-lights.
home-media ===
the-rise of skywalker was scheduled to be released on digital-hd on march 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the-light of the-covid-19-pandemic.
the-rise of skywalker-dvd, blu-ray, and 4k-ultra-hd-release was followed on march 31 by walt-disney-studios-home-entertainment.
the-4k-version of the-film was also released in "the skywalker saga" ultra hd blu-ray box set that-same-date.
the-4k-version of the-film was released on disney+
on may 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of its-previously-scheduled-release-date.
== reception == ===
box-office ===
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the-united-states and canada, and $558.9 million in other-territories, for a-worldwide-total of $1.074 billion.
deadline-hollywood calculated the-net-profit of the-film to be $300 million when factoring together all-expenses and revenues.
pre-sale-tickets went on sale on october 21, 2019, and the-film sold more-tickets in pre-sale-tickets first hour of availability on atom-tickets than the-previous-record-holder for ticket-sales, avengers: endgame (2019).
endgame (2019) became atom-tickets'-second-best-first-day-seller of all-time behind endgame, selling more-than-twice-the-number of tickets as the-last-jedi sold in that-same-timeframe, while fandango reported fandango outsold all-previous-star-wars-films.
box-office-tracking had the-rise of skywalker grossing around $200 million in box-office-tracking opening weekend, though some-firms predicted a-debut closer to $175 million.
the-film made $90 million on christmas-day, including $40 million from thursday-night-previews.
the-film went on to debut to $177.3 million, and  the-film was also noted that saturday (which saw a-47%-drop from friday's gross) was the-busiest-shopping-day of the-year, likely affecting ticket-sales.
the-film made $32 million on christmas-day, the-second-best-total ever for the-holiday after the-force awakens' $49.3 million in 2015.
the-film went on to have a-five-day-total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the-weekend.
in  the-film third-weekend,  the-film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in
the-film fourth weekend by newcomer 1917 (2019).worldwide-the-film was projected to gross around $450 million in
the-film-opening-weekend, including $250 million from 52-international-territories.
the-film made $59.1 million from the-film first day of international-release in 46-countries.
the-biggest-markets were the-united-kingdom ($8.3 million), germany ($7.2 million), france ($5.3 million), and australia ($4.3 million).
in china, the-film made $1.6 million (rmb11.6 million) through the-film first day.
the-film went on to open to $198 million from overseas-countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than the-last-jedi's-total.
the-film-biggest-opening-totals remained the-uk ($26.8 million), germany ($21.8 million), france ($15.2 million), japan ($14.6 million), australia ($12.6 million), and china ($12.1 million).
critical-response ===
on the-review-aggregator-website rotten-tomatoes, 51% of 507-reviews are positive, with an-average-rating of 6.1/10.
the-website's-critical-consensus reads, "the-rise of skywalker suffers from a-frustrating-lack of imagination, but concludes this-beloved-saga with fan-focused-devotion. "
as of january 2020, the-film is the-lowest-rated-live-action-film of the-star-wars-series.
according to the-review-aggregator metacritic, which sampled 61-reviews and calculated a-weighted-average of 53 out of 100, the-rise of skywalker received "mixed-or-average-reviews".
richard-roeper, reviewing for the-chicago-sun-times, gave the-film three-stars out of four, writing that the-film "rarely comes close to touching-greatness, but the-film's a-solid,-visually-dazzling-and-warmhearted-victory [for] quality-filmmaking."
the-a.v.-club's-a.-a.-dowd gave the-film a-c+, stating that the-film "is so freighted with obligation that the-film almost groans under the-weight, flashing a-weak-smile as it vaguely approximates the-appearance of a-zippy-good-time."
michael-phillips for chicago-tribune wrote that the-film "does the-job.
it wraps up the-trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a-confident,-soothingly-predictable-way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the]-tradition-minded-quadrants of the-star-wars-fan-base. "
mick-lasalle of the-san-francisco-chronicle described the-film as "a-disappointment" and wrote, "for all-the-movie's-faults, it's likely that most-people will consider the-rise of skywalker and accept the-trade: sit through a
so-so 110-minutes to get to a-strong-half-hour. "
owen-gleiberman of variety called the-film "the most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying star-wars-adventure since the-glory-days of star-wars (1977) and the empire strikes back (1980) [...]
but given the-last-eight-films, the-bar isn't that high.
the-bbc's-nicholas-barber praised the-film "'s acting and wrote, "the-rise of skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a-host of talented-people, and yet the best the-rise of skywalker can do is pay tribute to everything he did several decades ago. "
mendelson for forbes described the-film as "possibly worse" compared to the-previous-skywalker-saga-films while ending the-main-saga and "denying this-new-trilogy this-new-trilogy artistic reason for existence", and criticized the-film for retconning the-last-jedi and the-film plot; saying that-"patronizing-reversals in the-name of mollifying the-fans who merely want to be reminded of the-first-three-movies."
justin-chang of the-los-angeles-times described the-film as "a-last-jedi-corrective", which is "more-accurate-way to describe the-film" and is "an-epic-failure of nerve"; saying that "feels more like a-retreat, a return to a-zone of emotional-and-thematic-safety from a-filmmaker with a-gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
writing for the-new-yorker, richard-brody states that the-film's-faults "are those of the-franchise over all"; as the-film's-director "j.-j.-abrams is mainly a-distiller and a-magnifier and brings virtually-no-originality to it", using the-controls of michael-bay.
whereas asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran was a-main-character in the-last-jedi, asian-actress-kelly-marie-tran appears for about-a-minute in the-rise of skywalker.
the-reduced-role was interpreted by some-critics as a-concession to fans who disliked her-character; tran had been a-target of online-harassment following the-release of the-last-jedi.
people involved on the-previous-film defended her, with some claiming some of the-attackers were racist, and body shamers.
critics said her was "sidelined" into a-minor-character, and commented on how her was written out "without any-explanation" and her-minor-role was considered by one-critic to be "one of the-previous-film's-biggest-disappointments".
in regards to the-criticism towards her-reduced-screen-time, screenwriter-chris-terrio said it was due to the-difficulty of including the-deceased-carrie-fisher-archive-footage in scenes planned to feature both-characters.
audience-response ===
according to cinemascore, american-audiences gave cinemascore an-average-grade of "b+" on an-a+ to f-scale, the lowest among the-live-action-films.
on posttrak, audiences gave cinemascore an-average-four-stars out of five, with 70% saying audiences would definitely recommend cinemascore; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening-night-attendance) gave cinemascore a-full-five-stars out of five.
men (who made up 67% of the-audience) gave cinemascore an-overall-positive-score of 80% while women (32%) gave cinemascore an-84%.
relishmix, which tracks social-media-posts and online-presence, "noticed a-divided-reaction to skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
months prior to the-film's-trailer-release,
months was review bombed on rotten-tomatoes to the-point where the "want to see" percentage went down as far as 5% within a-day, with many of the-reviews focusing on lingering-negativity towards the-last-jedi.
similar-bombing with captain-marvel (2019) caused rotten-tomatoes to completely remove the "want to see"  feature after temporarily changing similar-bombing with captain-marvel (2019) to a-number.
accolades === ==
references == ==
external-links ==
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at starwars.com-star-wars: the-rise of skywalker at lucasfilm.com-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at imdb
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at allmovie
star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker on wookieepedia, a-star-wars-wiki-star-wars:
the-rise of skywalker at disney-a to
z this-list of characters from the-star-wars-franchise contains only those which are considered part of the-official-star-wars-canon, as of the-changes made by lucasfilm in april 2014.
following its-acquisition by the-walt-disney-company in 2012, lucasfilm rebranded most of the-novels, comics, video-games and other-works produced since the-originating-1977-film star-wars as star-wars legends and declared them non-canon to the-rest of the-franchise.
as such, z-this-list of characters from the-star-wars-franchise contains only-information from the-skywalker-saga-films, the-2008-animated-tv-series star-wars: the-clone-wars, and works published after april 2014.
this-list of characters from the-star-wars-franchise is organized in humans and various-alien-species.
no-droid-characters are included, so for those, see the-list of star-wars-droid-characters.
some of the-characters featured in the-list of star-wars-droid-characters have additional-or-alternate-plotlines in the-non-canonical-legends-continuity.
to see those or characters who do not exist at all in the-current-star-wars-canon, see the-list of star-wars-legends-characters and list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters.
humans are a-sentient,-sapient-species in the-fictional-star-wars-universe.
humans are the-most-numerous-and-dominant-species, with apparently-millions of major-and-minor-colonies galaxy-wide.
humans are native to many-different-worlds, and humans are characterized by multidimensional-complex-personalities that are humans individual and unique.
humans are the-only-race accepted as pure by emperor-palpatine.
by the-time the-hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a-few-scattered-worlds throughout the-galaxy; according to the-new-essential-chronology,  humans managed to send out a-number of 'sleeper-ships' between the-fall of the-rakatan-infinite-empire and the-invention of the-hyperdrive.
star-wars-humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life-humans.
the-presence of ordinary-humans in the-story is important dramatically and the-first-movie establishes their-vulnerability and weakness.
luke-skywalker's-introduction early in the-first-movie was rewritten to establish this.
in the-star-wars-mythology, the-human-homeworld, according to the-new-essential-chronology, is generally believed to be coruscant.
however, there is actually no-real-consensus on the-issue; according to releases from the-official-starwars.com-site, the-ancient-human-home-world has simply been lost to history.
star-wars-humans live on many-different-worlds throughout the-galaxy, with many-populations living together with several-other-species—something which is most common either on the-cosmopolitan-worlds at the-core, such as on coruscant, or on the-frontier at the-outer-rim of the-galaxy, such as on tatooine.
skywalker-and-solo-families === ====
extended-family ====
naberrie-family---padmé-amidala's-family lars-family---luke's-adoptive-familyorgana
family---leia's-adoptive-family ===
force-wielders ===
human-force-sensitive-characters.
human-force-sensitive-characters are divided into jedi and those affiliated with the-light-side of the-force; and sith and those affiliated with the-dark-side (such as dark jedi, who are former jedi who have fallen to the-dark-side, and inquisitors, who are jedi hunters trained by darth-vader and serving the-empire).
mandalorians ===
mandalorians are a-culture of humans from the-planet-mandalore with strong-warrior-traditions.
most of them wear armor and helmets, the-strongest-ones made from beskar, a-blaster-resistant-steel that is originally from mandalore.
the-mandalorian-culture was carried on by humans from mandalore around the-galaxy.
the-name of their-home-planet, "mandalore", is the same as the-title given to their-leader.
the-mandalorians are also associated with the-darksaber, a-black-bladed-lightsaber built by tarre-vizsla, the-first-mandalorian-jedi, which has since become a-symbol of power for the-mandalorian-people and is passed from a-leader to the next.
galactic-republic ===
galactic-republic
=== is a-democractic-government, overseen by a-galactic-senate, that governed most of the-known-galaxy for thousands of years.
with the-help of the-jedi-order, it maintained intergalactic-peace, but during it last-years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous-planets and systems to abandon  galactic-republic === and form the-confederacy of independent-systems.
the-ensuing-conflict between the-two-factions became known as the-clone-wars, which supreme chancellor palpatine, secretly the sith lord darth sidious and the mastermind behind the-war, took advantage of to manipulate  galactic-republic
==='s senators and citizens into supporting his-plans for the-government's-reorganization into the-galactic-empire for the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace".
galactic-republic
=== serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-prequel-trilogy, which depicts its-downfall and conversion into the-galactic-empire.
clone-troopers ====
clone-troopers were the-soldiers of the-galactic-republic's-army during the-clone-wars.
created from jango-fett's-dna, clone-troopers were genetically modified to have accelerated-growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning-obedience to the-chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling-biochips, which were put to use during order 66, when clone-troopers turned on and tried to kill clone-troopers jedi generals.
confederacy of independent-systems ===
confederacy of independent-systems
=== is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems formerly-part of the-galactic-republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the-corruption and injustice within the-galactic-senate.
formed by count-dooku under the-orders of count-dooku master, darth-sidious, it is the-main-antagonistic-faction of the-prequel-trilogy.
most of the-planets that made up  confederacy of independent-systems === attempted to earn  confederacy of independent-systems ===
freedom by force, engaging in the-three-year-long-clone-wars with the-republic using an-army of battle-droids.
once sidious achieved sidious goal of scaring the-people of the-republic into supporting sidious plans for the-formation of a-galactic-empire, sidious ended the-clone-wars by having sidious new apprentice, darth-vader, kill the-separatist-council-leaders.
the-remaining-systems of the-confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the-newly-formed-empire.
rebel-alliance ===
rebel-alliance === is an-organization of multiple-planets and systems that oppose the-rule of the-newly-formed-empire,
with which rebel-alliance === engages in the-five-year-long-galactic-civil-war.
rebel-alliance === serves as the-protagonist-faction of the-original-trilogy.
the-partisans are a-faction or rebels led by saw-gerrera known for  the-partisans extreme methods, who have distanced  the-partisans from the-rest of the-alliance.
rogue one is a-squad of rebel-soldiers formed in the-film of the-same-name that embarked on a-suicide-mission to steal the-death-star's-schematics.
erso-and-gerrera-families ==== ===
galactic-empire ===
galactic-empire
=== is an-autocracy formed by emperor-palpatine at the-end of the-clone-wars, replacing the-old-galactic-republic.
palpatine's-rise to power and manipulation of the-galactic-senate into supporting palpatine-plans for the-formation of an-empire and extermination of the-jedi-order with the-purpose of intergalactic-"peace" are depicted in the-prequel-trilogy.
in the-prequel-trilogy,  galactic empire === serves as the-main-antagonistic-faction.
at its-peak,  galactic-empire ===  galactic-empire === sprawled most of the-known-star-wars-galaxy.
the-empire was eventually defeated by the-rebel-alliance and collapsed, but some-remnants continued to exist for 30-years and reunited to form the-first-order.
the-stormtroopers are the elite, faceless-shock-troops serving  the-empire's-military.
originally the-clone-troopers of the-republic's-army, over time the-clone-troopers of the-republic's-army became mostly human-recruits.
resistance ===
the-resistance is a-military-organization founded and led by leia-organa, and the-successor of the-rebel-alliance.
the-resistance fought against the-first-order to defend the-new-republic and maintain peace in the-galaxy, 30 years after the-conclusion of the-galactic-civil-war.
it is the-protagonist-faction of the-sequel-trilogy.
the-new-republic
the-new-republic is a-democractic-government established in the-aftermath of the-galactic-empire's-defeat.
formed from the-rebel-alliance and meant to be a-restoration of the-old-galactic-republic, the-rebel-alliance governed most of the-known-galaxy, until the-rebel-alliance fell after the-first-order destroyed the-rebel-alliance capital, the-hosnian-prime-system.
the-new-republic is only briefly featured in the-sequel-trilogy, but has a-more-prominent-presence in related-works.
first-order ===
the-first-order is an-autocratic-military-dictatorship and the-successor of the-galactic-empire, formed from
the-first-order-remnants.
the-first-order-main-goal is to overthrow the-new-republic and destroy the-resistance and luke-skywalker, the-last-jedi.
the-first-order is the-central-antagonistic-faction of the-sequel-trilogy.
ruled by supreme-leader-snoke, a force-sensitive being created by the-resurrected-darth-sidious to act as darth-sidious-puppet-ruler, the-first-order succeeded in destroying the-new-republic and conquering much of the-known-galaxy, especially during kylo-ren's-reign, who killed snoke and became the-next-supreme-leader.
near the-end of its-one-year-long-war with the-resistance, its allied its with the-sith-eternal, a-secret-cult of sith-loyalists led by sidious on exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the-remains of the-resistance and the-civilians of the-galaxy, who finally gathered the-courage to rise against both-oppressors.
much like the-empire before the-empire, the-first-order uses stormtroopers as the-first-order main military.
most-stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from most-stormtroopers homes and brainwashed into serving the-first-order.
bounty-hunters, mercenaries, and criminals === ===
naboo-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of naboo.
tatooine-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of tatooine.
sorgan-humans ===
humans who are native to the-planet of sorgan.
versio-family ===
uncategorized-humans === ==
other-sentient-species ==
a-mix of non-human-characters from the-star-wars-galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical-order.
a–e === ====
abednedos ====
abednedos are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to the-planet-abednedo.
they have either-brown-or-tan-skin, mouth-tendrils, long-faces, and widely-spaced-fleshy-nostrils.
abednedos are known for abednedos ingenuity, and generally-peaceful-nature, being acceptant of other-species.
abyssins ====
abyssins ==== are a-humanoid,-cycloptic,-sentient-species native to byss.
they have green-or-blue-skin, can regenerate missing-limbs, and can live for up-to-300-years.
aleena ====
the-aleena are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to aleen.
the-aleena have scaly-skin, elongated-skulls, and large-mouths with tiny-teeth.
anacondans ====
anacondans ==== are a-large,-snake-like-sentient-species.
anzellans ====
anzellans are a-diminutive-sentient-species native to anzellan.
anzellans-eyes have corneal-micro-lenses that can see microscopic-details.
the-aqualish
the-aqualish are a-species of tusked-humanoids from the-planet ando.
they can have either-two-or-four-eyes, fur around they cheeks, and varying skin-color and number of fingers.
the-aqualish have a-reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.
ardennians ====
ardennians are a-species of short,-four-armed,-monkey-like-humanoids from the-planet-ardennia.
artiodacs ====
artiodacs are a-hulking,-humanoid,-sentient-species from artiod-minor.
artiodacs are distinguished by artiodacs broad, flat-noses, bulging-arms, and deep,-rumbling-voices.
askajians ====
==== are a-near-human-species from askaji, whose-bulky-appearance is given by whose-bulky-appearance internal water storages.
whose-bulky-appearance are also distinguished by whose-bulky-appearance wrinkled foreheads and six-breasts (present at females).
bardottans ====
bardottans are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like-sentient-species from bardotta.
bardottans are distinguished by  bardottans long, curving necks, pointed-snouts, and crested-heads, and are a-generally-insular-and-secretive-society.
besalisks ===
besalisks are a-humanoid,-four-armed,-sentient-species from ojom.
often-thick-set,  often-thick-set are also distinguished by  often-thick-set bony, three-pronged headcrests, inflatable-wattles, and wide-mouths, with large,-pudgy-lips.
besalisks are known to be industrious and hardworking.
bith ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-bith.
they are distinguished by they bald, domed-heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on they faces, which are used to smell because they lack noses.
they are a-generally-intelligent-and-peaceful-species, and are known to be good-scientists, engineers, and musicians.
blarina ====
blarina ==== are a-species of short,-pudgy,-sentient-humanoids from the-planet rina-major.
they have snouts, tough-skin, and small-eyes.
the-blarina are famously-accomplished-liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.
cereans ====
cereans ==== are a-near-human-species from the-planet-cerea, distinguished by their-coned-skulls, which hold their-binary-brains.
they are known to be an-intelligent-species, although they homeworld lacks most of the-advanced-technology found on other-planets.
chagrians ====
==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from the-planet-champala.
chagrians ==== are distinguished by chagrians ====-long-horns, head-tentacles with additional-horns, forked tongue, and varying skin-color.
chagrians are known for  chagrians skills as military-commanders.
chiss ====
chiss ==== are a-near-human-species native to csilla, distinguished by chiss ====
blue-skin, red-eyes, and dark-blue-black-hair.
prior to thrawn's-rise within the-ranks of the-galactic-empire, chiss ==== had relatively-very-little-contact with the-rest of the-galaxy, and some even considered some-existence a myth.
clawdites ====
==== are a-species of sentient,-shape-shifting,-reptilian-humanoids from the-planet-zolan.
with their-unique-ability their can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the-shape-shifting requires great-concentration and their-return to their-true,-reptilian-form if knocked unconscious or killed.
cloddograns ====
cloddograns are a-humanoid-species with four-arms and nose-tendrils.
cosians ====
cosians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species native to cosia.
they are short in stature and have beaked-mouths, four-fingered-hands, and medium-length-tails.
a-genetically-engineered-subspecies called nu-cosians also exists.
crolutes ====
crolutes are a-species of hulking,-amphibian,-sentient-humanoids from the-planet-crule, distinguished by their-blobfish-like-faces.
their are all males, while their-mates, called gilliands, are exclusively female.
crolutes rarely travel beyond their-homeworld and  crolutes moons.
delphidians-delphidians are a-near-human-species from the-planet-delphidian-cluster, with dark-gray,-leathery,-and-striated-skin.
devaronians ====
devaronians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to devaronian.
devaronians are distinguished by devaronians two horns (present only at males), pointed-ears, and sharp-teeth.
the-males are known for the-males spirit of travel and are among the-first-species in the-galaxy to develop interstellar-travel, while the-females usually remain on the-males homeworld to look after the-children and govern the-place.
dianoga ====
dianoga ==== are large,-highly-adaptable-cephalopods from the-planet-vodran.
==== live in semi-aquatic-environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive-species.
dowutins ====
dowutins are a-species of large,-sentient-humanoids native to dowut.
dowutins have a-bulky-build, brown-orange-skin, and two-chin-horns.
dowutins are known for  dowutins strength, and can live for several-centuries.
dressellians ====
dressellians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to dressel, distinguished by  dressellians round, hairless, wrinkled faces.
dugs are a-sentient-species from the-planet-malastare, distinguished by  dressellians elongated-faces, and the-fact that  dressellians walk on  dressellians arms.
dressellians are known to be very greedy.
duros ====
duros (or "durosians") are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-duro, with large,-ovular-heads, red-eyes and blue-skin.
duros (or "durosians") are known for duros (or "durosians") superior-astronavigational-skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the-development of hyperdrives and other-related-technological-advancements.
er'kit ====
the-er'kit are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet er'kit.
the-er'kit have white-blue-skin, long-skinny-legs, and elongated-skulls.
ewoks ====
ewoks are a-small,-furry,-sentient-species who live in trees on the-forest-moon of endor.
while primitive, primitive have proven primitive to be loyal,-skilled-hunters, and ingenious in designing primitive-traps.
f–j === ====
falleen ====
==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species native to falleen.
falleen ==== have green-skin, ridged-skulls, and long,-black-hair, usually worn in ponytails.
faust ====
the-faust are a-species of tall,-slender,-gray-or-purple-skinned-humanoids native to adana.
the-faust are recognized by
the faust narrow faces and two-sets of eyelids.
gabdorins ====
gabdorins ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species with large,-round-heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.
gamorreans ====
gamorreans are a-humanoid,-pig-like,-sentient-species native to gamorr.
they have green,-thick,-and-hairless-skin,-large-nostriled-snouts, and upturned-tusks.
gamorreans are known for they-low-intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.
gand ==== are a-humanoid,-insectoid,-sentient-species native to gand.
gand ==== have three-fingered-hands, two-toed feet, and large, silver-coloured eyes.
gand ==== wear respiratory-masks in oxygen-rich-environments, because it is toxic to gand ====.
geonosians ====
geonosians are a-humanoid,-winged,-insectoid-sentient-species native to geonosis.
geonosians live in large-colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a-primitive-species, but are skilled-engineers and operated the-confederacy of independent-systems' battle-droid-factories during the-clone-wars.
gossams ====
gossams are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to castell.
gossams have wrinkled-skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
gossams are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive-jewelry for this-reason, such as neck-rings.
gran ====  gran ==== are a-humanoid,-three-eyed,-sentient-species native to kinyen and malastare, and with major-colonies on several-other-planets, such as hok and varkana.
they have brown-orange-skin, goat-like-snouts, bulky-hands, and small-antennae-like-nubs.
kinyen are known for  gran ====
peaceful-nature, pursuing simple-careers like farmers, while others have more-dangerous-pastimes.
gungans ====
gungans are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-and-sapient-species native to the-swamps of naboo.
gungans have a-very-flexible-skeletal-structure, long-necks and head-tails, and muscular-tongues.
while usually regarded as clumsy and primitive, gungans have proven gungans to be very loyal and ingenious.
harches ====
harches ==== are
a-humanoid,-spider-like,-sentient-species native to secundus-ando.
they have six-arms, six-red-eyes, fangs, and brown-or-white-hair that covers most of they body, and can supposedly live for centuries.
hutts ====
hutts are a-portly,-grotesque,-slug-like-sentient-species native to nal-hutta.
hutts are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt, are crime-lords, and speak in some-famous-hutts, such as jabba the-hutt native language, huttese.
iktotchi ====
the-iktotchi are a-near-human-species from the-planet-iktotch, recognized  the-iktotchi large cranian horns.
ithorians ====
ithorians are a-species of humanoids from the-planet-ithor, with curved-necks and two-mouths, located on the-sides of the-neck.
their-faces resemble those of hammerhead-sharks, for which-reason their were nicknamed "hammerheads".
k–o === ====
kaleesh ====
kaleesh ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from the-planet-kalee.
they have red-skin, elongated-ears, and flat-noses (which are rarely seen because they wear masks), and are known for being skilled-and-merciless-warriors and hunters.
kaminoans ====
kaminoans ==== are a-species of tall,-thin,-amphibian,-sentient-humanoids from the-ocean-planet-kamino.
kaminoans ==== have white-skin, large-eyes, and long-necks and limbs.
kaminoans are skilled-scientists specialized in cloning-technology, and were responsible for the-creation of the-republic's-clone-army during the-clone-wars.
karkarodon ====
karkarodon ==== are a-humanoid,-shark-like,-amphibian-sentient-species from the-planet-karkaris.
with their-webbed-feet and hands and sharp-teeth, their are fast-swimmers and skilled-hunters.
kel-dors ====
kel-dors ===
= are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet dorin.
kel-dors ====
body is covered by a-leathery-hide, which allows kel-dors ==== to survive the-vacuum of space for a-brief-time, and kel-dors ==== wear respiratory-masks and protective-eye-goggles on planets with oxygen-rich-atmospheres, because their-body is toxic to kel-dors ====.
kiffar ====
==== are a-near-human-species from the-planets kiffu and kiffex, distinguished by their-ceremonial-tattoos and scarlet-blood.
kitonak ====
kitonak ==== are a-species native to kirdo-iii, distinguished by kitonak ====
white-pink-and-tough-skin, large-hands and feet, and tiny-eyes, ears and mouths.
they are known to be slow-and-patient,-but-also-skilled-musicians.
klatooinians ====
klatooinians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from klatooine.
klatooinians are distinguished by klatooinians leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy-underbites.
==== koorivar ====
the-koorivar are a-near-human-sentient-species with reptilian-like-skin and a-large-cranial-horn that spirals upwards from the-koorivar skull.
kowakian-monkey-lizards ====
kowakian-monkey-lizards are a-small,-semi-sentient-species from kowak.
they have beak-like-mouths, long-ears, medium-length-tails, and a-distinct-laughter, which is used to scare predators on they homeworld.
most are kept as pets by members of the-underworld.
kubaz ====
kubaz ==== are a-humanoid-sentient-species from kubindi, distinguished by kubaz ====
long-snouts, dark-skin, protective-eyewear, and unique-manner of speech, consisting of a-series of whirring-syllables.
kyuzo ====
kyuzo ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from phatrong.
kyuzo ====
have green-skin, wrinkled-faces, and yellow-eyes, and are known for kyuzo ====
exceptional-combat-abilities and fast-reflexes.
when not on kyuzo ====
homeworld, kyuzo ==== always wear masks to filter the-atmosphere, which conceal most of kyuzo ==== faces.
lanniks ===
lanniks are a-species of short-humanoids from the-planet-lannik, with long,-droppy-ears.
long, droppy-ears are known for long, droppy-ears honor and bravery.
lasats ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to lira-san, though  lasats ==== later settled on lasan.
==== are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior-sight and hearing thanks to  lasats ====
large-eyes and ears, respectively.
lasats ==== are distinguished by  lasats ==== prehensile feet, and varying fur-patterns, which are unique for every-individual.
the-species was nearly driven to extinction by the-empire.
latero ====
latero ==== are a-short,-four-armed,-humanoid-sentient-species from lateron.
latero ==== have small,-pointed-ears, gray-skin, and gray-sideburns-hair.
==== are species of bipedal,-humanoid,-sentient-rabbits.
lurmen ====
lurmen ==== are a-species of diminutive,-lemur-like-humanoids from mygeeto.
they have brown-and-gray-fur, large-yellow-eyes, and medium-length-tails.
pacifists by nature, pacifists by nature have often found pacifists by nature oppressed for this-reason.
melitto ====
the-mellito are a-humanoid,-insectoid,-sentient-species from li-torran.
they lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing they environment using super-sensitive-hairs called cilia.
they also wear masks and use breathing-tubes to filter other-planets'-atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to they.
miraluka ====
miraluka ==== are a-species of near-humans, distinguished by their-lack of eyes.
the-only-known-member of this-species, prosset-dibs, could use the-force to make up for the-force lack of eyesight and become familiar with the-force surroundings ====
mirialans ====
==== are a-near-human-species from mirial.
mirialans ==== are distinguished from humans by mirialans ====
skin-color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric-tattoos on mirialans ==== faces.
mirialans are known for  mirialans spirituality and strong-connection with the-world around  mirialans.
mon-calamari ====
mon-calamari are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species native to mon-cala.
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though they skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands.
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though their-skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands are known for
they have salmon-coloured-skin (though their-skin may have other-tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a-high-domed-head with large,-sideways-eyes, and webbed-hands-swimming-and-engineering-abilities.
mortis-gods ====
mortis-gods ==== are a-family of three-mythical,-immortal,-and-god-like-beings who are the-sole-inhabitants of the-force-realm-mortis.
mortis-gods ==== are believed to be the-embodiments of the-force itself: the-light-side, the-dark-side, and the-balance between the two.
muuns ====
muuns === are a-tall,-thin,-humanoid-sentient-species with elongated-skulls and flat-noses.
known across the-galaxy as greed-driven-bankers, greed-driven-bankers ran the-intergalactic-banking-clan during the-galactic-republic-era.
mythrol ====
the-mythrol are a-humanoid,-sentient-species with blue-skin and amphibious-traits.
nautolans ====
nautolans are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from glee-anselm.
nautolans are distinguished by nautolans head tentacles, which allow nautolans to detect chemicals, and large,-black,-pupil-less-eyes.
nautolans are a-generally-peaceful-species, but can be strong-warriors when needed to.
neimoidians ====
neimoidians ==== are a-humanoid-large-eyed,-amphibian,-and-reptilian-like-sapient-species native to neimoidia.
neimoidians ==== are known for neimoidians
====-dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the-trade-federation during the-galactic-republic-era.
nikto ====
the-nikto are a-humanoid-sentient-species native to kintan.
there are at-least-three-known-subspecies: the-red-nikto (kajain'sa'nikto), the-green-nikto (kadas'sa'nikto), and the-mountain-nikto (esral'sa'nikto); the former two have scaly,-coarse-skin and horns and spikes on at-least-three-known-subspecies: the-red-nikto (kajain'sa'nikto), the-green-nikto (kadas'sa'nikto), and the-mountain-nikto (esral'sa'nikto) face, while the latter present no-horns and have facial-fins instead.
noghri ====
noghri ==== are a-humanoid,-short,-sentient-species native to honoghr.
noghri ==== have grey,-leathery-skin with a-row of horns on  noghri ====
head, sharp-teeth, and
clawed fingers, and are known for  noghri ====
exceptional-combat-abilities and keen-sense of smell.
nosaurians ====
nosaurians are a-humanoid-sentient-species from the-planet new-plympto.
nosaurians are distinguished by  nosaurians six horns, red-eyes, and orange, white, and yellow-skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.
ongrees ====
ongrees-a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from skustell.
they are distinguished by sideways-eyes, located underneath they mouths, four-nostrils, and lipless-mouths.
most-ongrees are considered to be even-minded-individuals and are skilled-diplomats and negotiators.
ortolans ====
ortolan are a-species of squat,-blue-skinned,-sentient-humanoids from orto.
they are distinguished by  they large, floppy ears, trunk-like-noses, and black-eyes, and are known to consume large-amounts of nutrients through
they fingers.
some-ortolans have no-arms.
ovissians ====
ovissians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species, distinguished by ovissians four-head-horns (two-sideways-horns, and two extending from the-chin).
they can have either-green-or-orange-skin, which matches the-color of they blood.
p–t === ====
pa'lowicks ====
pa'lowicks are a-sentient-species from lowick.
pa'lowicks have bulbous-bodies supported by long,-reed-thin-legs, small-eyes located in stalks on the-top of  pa'lowicks heads, and long,-thin,-trunk-like-mouths.
palliduvans ====
palliduvans ==== are a-near-human-species, with chalky-white-skin, and long,-bony-fingers, with which they can draw blood.
pantorans ====
pantorans ==== are a-near-human-species from the-moon of pantora, distinguished by pantorans ====-blue-skin.
pau'ans ====
pau'ans are a-species of gaunt,-tall,-and-long-limbed-humanoids from utapau.
pau'ans have white-or-gray-skin, sunken-eyes, and sharp,-jugged-teeth.
pau'ans are an-intelligent-and-peaceful-species, though  pau'ans often seem afraid of outsiders.
phindians ====
phindians are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from phindar.
phindians have green-yellow-skin, long-arms, and elongated-skulls, and are known to be very cautious.
pykes ====
pykes ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from oba-diah.
they are distinguished by  they elongated, tapered skulls with an-undersized-face.
the-pykes are best known for running the-pyke-syndicate, an-illegal-spice-dealing-group.
quarren ====
quarren ==== are a-humanoid,-amphibian,-sentient-species from mon-cala.
they have four-tentacles protruding from they jaws, for which-reason they are nicknamed "squid heads" around the-galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the-ability to spit ink in self-defense.
they are more introverted than the-mon-calamari, with whom they share they homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to they planet.
quermians ====
quermians ==== are a-species of gaunt,-tall,-long-necked-and-white-skinned-humanoids from quermia.
rodians ===
rodians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to rodia.
rodians have green-skin, antennas, large-pupil-less-eyes, a-row of spike on the-back of rodians head, slender-snouts, and fingers with suction-cups at the-end.
ubb ==== are a-diminutive,-amphibian,-sentient-species with green-skin and small-faces that sport heavy brow ridges.
skakoans ====
skakoans ==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to skakoa.
they have crown-shaped-skulls and are required to wear special-suits with breathing-masks to survive off special-suits homeworld.
skakoans are best known for running the-techno-union during the-galacic-republic-era.
snivvians ====
snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species native to cadomai-prime.
they have a-protruding-lower-jaw with two-small-tusks, and large-nostrils.
snivvians have great-tracking-skills, and are good-scouts and trackers.
sullustans ====
sullustans are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sullust.
they are mouse-eyed and have two-flaps of jowls around they cheeks.
sullustans are a-sophisticated-species and experts at manufacturing, scientific-and-technological-development, and economics.
the-tarsunt
the-tarsunt are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tarsunt.
they have long faces, widely-spaced-nostrils, and hair on various-places of they body, including they faces, where it resembles a-beard.
teedos ====
teedos === are a-short,-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from jakku.
teedos === have three-fingered-hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
all-teedos are identical, sharing the-same-name and a-telepathic-connection that allows one-teedo to recount events experienced by another.
terrelian-jango-jumpers ====
terrelian-jango-jumpers are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from terrelia.
terrelian-jango-jumpers are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue,-gray,-and-white-skin.
thisspiasians ====
thissipiasians are a-humanoid,-serpentine,-sentient-species from thisspias.
while the-lower-part of their-bodies is snake-like, their have arms and can grow facial-hair.
tholothians ====
tholothians
==== are a-near-human-species from tholoth, distinguished by  tholothians
====-scaled-craniums and head-tendrils.
the-togruta
the-togruta are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-shili.
they are distinguished by  they three, rarely-four-"head-tails" called lekku (similar to those of twi'leks), which are striped to help  they blend in with  they natural surroundings.
togrutas are known for  they-solidarity and for possessing a-form of passive-echolocation by means of  they-hollow-montrals, which allows  they to sense space and the-proximity and movement of physical-objects around  they.
toong ====
==== are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tund, with disproportionately-large-heads for a-humanoid,-sentient-species from tund, with disproportionately-large-heads for their-bodies-bodies.
toydarians ====
toydarians === are a-species of short,-winged-humanoids from toydaria.
toydarians === have long-snouts, tusks, and webbed-feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting force-mind-tricks.
trandoshans ====
trandoshans ==== are a-humanoid,-reptilian-like,-sentient-species from trandosha, known for their-hunting-abilities and bad-history with the-wookiees.
their are tall and muscular and have a-pointed-skull, sharp-teeth, long-claws, and four-fingers on their-hands and three on their-feet.
triffians ====
triffians are a-humanoid,-sentient-species recognized by  triffians triangle-shaped appendages that extend from  triffians shoulders to  triffians heads.
the-trodatome
the-trodatome are a-slug-like-sentient-species that lack arms, but possess sensory-antennas and flippers.
troigs ====
troigs ====
are a-two-headed-and-four-armed-humanoid-sentient-species from pollillus.
tusken-raiders ====
tusken-raiders, also known as sand-people or simply-tuskens, are a-culture of nomadic,-primitive-sentients indigenous native to tatooine.
they are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing they identity.
tuskens are known for they-aggressivity towards strangers, which they consider possible-threats, and unique-manner of speech, which combines vocal-sounds (mostly screams) with sign-language.
twi'leks ====
twi'leks are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to ryloth.
they are distinguished by
they "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the-back of they head, and varying skin-color.
twi'leks have a-history of being oppressed by other-species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the-underworld.
u–z === ====
ugnaughts ====
==== are a-short,-humanoid,-sentient-species from the-planet-gentes, with pig-like-faces.
they are considered to be one of the-hardest-working-species in the-galaxy.
umbarans ====
umbarans are a-near-human-species from umbara, distinguished by their-pale-skin and colorless-eyes, with which their can see in the-ultraviolet-spectrum.
their have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the-rest of the-galaxy.
veknoids ====
veknoids are a-humanoid,-sentient-species from moonus-mandel, distinguished by their-large-under-bites, sharp-teeth, slender-tails, and fleshy-ears.
vulptereens ====
vulptereens ==== are a-species of stocky-humanoids, recognizable by vulptereens ====
shovel-like-snouts which sport six-tusks and a-single-long-feeler.
the-vurk are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sembla.
the-vurk are distinguished by  the-vurk bony crests on the-top of  the-vurk heads (similar to those of the-parasaurolophus), and three-fingered-hands.
while regarded as a-primitive-species,  the-vurk are highly-empathetic-and-skilled-mediators.
weequays ====
weequays are a-humanoid,-sentient-species native to sriluur.
weequays are distinguished by  weequays though, leathery-skin, which helped  weequays survive the-harsh-life-conditions of  weequays homeworld.
most of  weequays are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty-hunters, as a-result of the-hutts'-takeover of sriluur.
wookiees ====
wookiees are a-large,-hairy,-primate-like-sentient-species native to kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch.
the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch are known for the-modern-day-depictions of sasquatch strength, loyalty, unique-manner of speech (depicted as a-series of growls and purrs), and bad-history with the-trandoshans.
xexto ====
the-xexto are a-species of short,-four-armed-humanoids from the-planet troiken.
they have white-skin, glassy-eyes, and long-necks and fingers.
yakora ====
the-yakura (also known as yakorans) are a-humanoid,-sentient-species, with yak-like-faces.
yoda's-species ====
"yoda's-species" is the-name given to a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member.
a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member is characterised by a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member pointy ears, strong-connection to the-force, and slow-aging, for which-reason a-species of diminutive,-green-skinned,-sentient-creatures, of which the-popular-character-yoda is a-member can live for several-centuries.
much about the-species, including the-force-name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.
yuzzums ====
==== are a-humanoid,-round-bodied,-furred,-sentient-species from the-forest-moon of endor.
yuzzums ==== have long-limbs compared to the-rest of  yuzzums ====
body, medium-length antennae, big-mouths, and no-neck.
yuzzums ==== are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.
zabraks ====
zabraks ==== are a-near-human,-sentient-species, distinguished by  zabraks ====-horns and tattoos.
most originate from iridonia (in which-case they are also referred to as iridonians), though some-males also lived on dathomir (in which-case they are referred to as dathomirians), as part of the-warrior-clan called the nightbrothers, who served the-witches known as the-nightsisters.
zygerrians ====
zygerrians are a-humanoid,-feline-like-sentient-species from zygerria, who had built and run the-biggest-slave-empire in the-galaxy, until the-jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
attempts to rebuild the-biggest-slave-empire were made during the-clone-wars and the-imperial-era, but were thwarted.
unknown-species === ==
see also ==
list of the-mandalorian-characters list of star-wars creatures list of star-wars droid characters list of star-wars legends characters
list of star-wars rebels characters list of star-wars: knights of the-old-republic-characters list of star-wars cast members list of star-wars:
star-wars cast members
